7

Dental Cements
OUTLINE
History of Dental Cements

Cements for Luting

Indications for Dental Cements

Endodontic Sealers

Performance Criteria for Dental Cements

Tri-/Dicalcium Silicate Cement

Solubility and Disintegration of Cements

Calcium Phosphate Cements

Fluoride-Releasing Materials

Summary

Pulp Protection

KEY TERMS
Acid–base reaction Chemical reaction between a compound
containing replaceable hydrogen ions (acid) and a substance
containing replaceable hydroxide ions (base) that yields a salt
and water; for aqueous liquid and powder cements, the liquid is
the acid, and the powder is the base.
Atraumatic restorative treatment (ART) Clinical procedure performed without dental burs, air/water spray, or anesthesia that
consists of manual excavation of cavitated carious tissues and
restoration of the tooth cavity with a fluoride-releasing cement.
Bioactivity Reactive potential of a material to form a layer of
hydroxyapatite-like material on its surface in vivo.
Calcium phosphate cements Cement that is used for bone
regeneration that consists of powder (di-, tri-, or tetra-calcium
phosphates) that is mixed with an aqueous solution from which
hydroxyapatite precipitates.
Cavity liner Material to coat the bottom of a cavity preparation to
protect the pulp; a liner is applied in a thin layer.
Cement Substance that hardens from a viscous state to a solid union
between two surfaces; for dental applications, cements act as a
base, liner, filling material, root canal sealer, or adhesive to bind
devices and prostheses to tooth structure or to each other.
Cement base Material used to protect the pulp in a cavity
preparation by providing thermal insulation and sometimes a
medicament, usually thicker and more distant from the pulp
than a cavity liner.
Cement thickness Distance between an abutment tooth and
cemented prosthesis, influenced by the design of the prosthesis
and the viscosity of the cement during seating.
Compomer A term derived from the terms composite and ionomer; a resin-based composite consisting of a silicate glass filler
phase and a methacrylate-based matrix with carboxylic groups;
also known as polyacid-modified glass-ionomer cement.
Endodontic sealer Material to prevent any transmittance of fluid
or bacteria from the coronal to the apical region, used in conjunction with an obturation material such as gutta-percha.
Film thickness Thickness in μm of a cement 7 min after 150 N
have been applied, which is the International Organization for
128

Standardization (ISO) and American Dental Association (ADA)
method for determining the ability of a cement to spread under
pressure.
Glass-ionomer cement (GIC) Cement that hardens following an
acid–base reaction between fluoroaluminosilicate glass powders and an aqueous-based polyacrylic solution; also known as
polyalkenoate cement.
Hydraulic cement Cement that requires water to cause the material to set.
Luting agent A viscous cement-like material that fills a gap
between two surfaces to prevent dislodgement. The term luting
agent originally referred to nonadhesive agents only but now
also includes adhesive agents.
Maturation Process of aqueous cement strengthening after setting.
Mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) A tri- and di-calcium silicatebased cement used for vital pulp therapy and other endodontic
indications.
Pulp capping A procedure to treat pulp that has been exposed
through caries removal or trauma, by the application of a medicament; indirect pulp capping is the term used when the pulpal
exposure is incipient, such as when dentinal tubules are visible
in the cavity.
Resin cement A resin-based composite material used for attaching fixed prostheses or orthodontic brackets; these cements are
less viscous than resin composite restorative materials.
Resin-modified glass-ionomer cement (hybrid ionomer
cement) Cement that combines a glass powder and an aqueous
solution of polymerizable groups attached to the polyacrylic acid.
Varnish Material applied to the floor of a cavity; a solution of natural gum, synthetic resins, or resins dissolved in volatile solvent,
such as acetone, ether, or chloroform; material applied superficially to a tooth to release fluoride.
Zinc oxide eugenol (ZOE) cement Cement based on the reaction
between zinc oxide and eugenol.
Zinc phosphate cement Substance formed by the reaction between zinc oxide powder and phosphoric acid liquid that can be
used either as a base or as a luting agent.

CHAPTER 7

Naturally occurring waxes and resins have been used since time
immemorial for covering the surface of broken teeth and adhering
replacement materials, including bone, animal teeth, wood, and early
naturally occurring polymers. However, problems arose with many
“natural” materials exposed to the warm, moist, and often acidic
oral environment, leading to their gradual failure in vivo. Modern
dentistry has evolved to achieve improved clinical results, which
include a wide variety of cements created by various chemical reactions. Cements are used for many indications and may be needed for
short-term (days to weeks), intermediate-term (weeks to months),
and long-term (years) retention of dental appliances (devices).

History of Dental Cements
In the 1800s, zinc oxide (ZnO) powder of good purity was found
to react with eugenol at room temperature to form a functional
cement. The ZnO–eugenol material was used as an impression
material and temporary restoration and was eventually found to
be obtundent with the pulp and suitable as a root canal sealer.
Zinc oxide was observed to react with phosphoric acid to yield
a material stronger than ZnO–eugenol, capable of securing gold
alloy restorations to tooth preparations. The high acidity of the
ZnO–phosphate cement was unsuitable for pulpal contact but a
good insulator for use as a base. In the mid-20th century, ZnO
was also used with carboxylic acid to produce a cement that was
lower in acidity and capable of bonding to tooth structure.
When the zinc oxide in zinc phosphate cement was replaced
with a glass powder, a semitranslucent esthetic filling called silicate
cement was created. The longevity of the silicate cement restorations was unimpressive (<4 years) because the silicate cements
have high solubility. Gradually, the silicate cements lost anatomical contour and degraded at the margins. Despite the deficiency,
the occurrence of recurrent caries adjacent to these cements was
rare. Laboratory studies showed that fluoride was released from
the glass in silicate cements. The impressive anticariogenic potential of the silicate cements highlighted the ability of fluoride ions
(F−) to inhibit demineralization.
The lessons learned from silicate cement and zinc carboxylate
cement led to the development of glass-ionomer cements (GICs),
which contained a modified glass for the powder and polyacrylic
acid for the liquid. Incorporating the polymerization technology
of methacrylate resin into the liquid created dual-cured materials: acid–base and polymerization reactions. From this combination, resin-modified glass-ionomer cement (RMGI) evolved.
Replacing the liquid component of RMGI with a water-free acidic
polymerizable monomer created a light-curable single-component
material called compomer, a term derived from the terms composite and ionomer. The goal of these two hybrid materials was to
combine the strength of composite with the fluoride release and
self-adhesion of glass ionomer in one material.
Around the mid-20th century, new attributes for dental cements
were needed for use with gutta-percha points in endodontic therapy. These cements are denoted as endodontic sealers, which must
cure in the moist root canal dentin. Furthermore, endodontic
materials must ensure that oral bacteria cannot percolate through
the root to the periapical bone; otherwise, serious infection persists
or occurs. Esthetics are less important for endodontic cements than
for supragingival indications. Several dental materials were adapted
for endodontic use: zinc oxide–eugenol (ZOE), polyvinyl siloxane, epoxy resins, and hydraulic ceramics (tri-/dicalcium silicate).
In the 1990s, the bioactivity and sealing ability of tri-/dicalcium
silicate cements became recognized and appreciated in dentistry.

Dental Cements

129

This ceramic dental cement is now widely indicated for pulpal and
periradicular contact, including endodontic indications.
Varnish has been used for pulpal protection, especially with
amalgam in a cavity preparation. The use of varnish has declined
with decreased amalgam use. However, surficial varnishes are
popular, especially among pediatric dentists. These varnishes are
placed on enamel to release fluoride to provide protection against
caries and promote remineralization from acids in the oral cavity
with calcium ions. Sealants based on resins are also used superficially on teeth to provide protection against caries.
In the 20th century, varnishes included silver ions, silver
nitrate, and silver diammine fluoride solutions for arresting caries and reducing sensitivity. The hazard with silver compounds is
imparting a black color to the caries, as discussed later.
Most current cements include polymers and ceramic powders.
The remainder of this chapter is organized by general indications: pulp protection and enamel protection, fixed prosthodontic
device cementation, endodontic restoratives, and sealing.

Indications for Dental Cements
Dental cements are classified according to their major component,
as shown in Table 7-1, which includes their general indications.
Several formats are offered for dental cements: powder and liquid, two pastes, or single component. Biocompatibility, durability
for the indication, and safety for the patient and dental practitioner are important general cement attributes, all with a “reasonable” price. Some cements achieve their biocompatibility by
being mildly cytotoxic, whereas others are bioinert or bioactive,
as described later. The biocompatibility of dental cements is discussed in general terms in this chapter. Principles of biocompatibility are discussed in Chapter 17, Biocompatibility.
Other characteristics are designed for a cement’s unique
indications, such as viscosity. For pulpal protection or surficial
tooth sealing, a fluid layer is usually suitable. A medium-viscosity
cement is used for cavity liner or cement-base indications. For
adhering an appliance, a cement must have a sufficiently low viscosity to flow along the interfaces between the tooth tissue and
a restorative. A low-viscosity cement is also needed to enable an
endodontic sealer to fill complex root canal anatomy. Orthodontic bands require a low-viscosity cement, but orthodontic brackets require higher-viscosity cements to keep orthodontic brackets
from drifting before the cement is cured. Base/liner materials
should flow and set within, but not out of, the cavity preparation.
Viscous cements are used for filling perforations, for root-end
filling, or for covering pulps after a pulpotomy. Whether low or
high viscosity, a low-contact-angle material is useful for wetting
the surface of enamel or dentin or a prosthetic device.
Cements must harden (set) within a reasonable time that
depends on the indication, ranging from minutes to days. Strength
requirements vary from a compressive strength of 35 MPa for
pulp capping and base materials to 50 MPa for aqueous cements
for the adhesion of devices. The strength should be appropriate
for the indication and increase during maturation. For instance,
the tri-/dicalcium silicate cements mature over about 1 month.
All cements undergo a chemical reaction in vivo. Varnishes set
by evaporation of the solvent to form a coherent protective layer.
Two-part cements begin setting/hardening when the components are mixed. Single-component polymer-based cements set
through polymerization activated by visible light. Dual-cured
resin cements use both chemical and light-curing mechanisms to
maximize polymerization. The hydraulic bioactive cements set by

130

PA RT I I

TABLE 7-1

Direct Restorative Materials

Overview of Dental Cements

Powder/Liquid Systems
Materials

Powder

Liquid

Reaction Type

Indications

Zinc phosphate

Zinc oxide and magnesium
oxide

Phosphoric acid, water

Acid–base reaction

Cementing metallic fixed
prostheses

Zinc oxide–eugenol

Zinc oxide

Eugenol

Acid–base reaction

Pulp protection, temporary
cement

Zinc oxide–eugenol (EBA
modified)

Zinc oxide

Eugenol, EBA

Acid–base reaction

Pulp protection, temporary
cement

Zinc polycarboxylate

Zinc oxide and magnesium
oxide

Polyacrylic acid, water

Acid–base reaction

Metallic fixed prostheses
short spans or crowns

Glass ionomer

Fluoroaluminosilicate glass

Polyacrylic acid, polybasic
carboxylic acid, water

Acid–base reaction

Cementing crowns (alumina,
zirconia metal), metal posts
and core restoration

Fluoroaluminosilicate glass,
chemical- and/or lightactivated initiator(s)

Polyacrylic acid, water-soluble
methacrylate monomer, water,
activator

Light- or chemical-activated
polymerization and acid–base
reaction

Fluoroaluminosilicate glass,
metallic oxides, sodium
fluoride, chemical- and/or
light-activated initiator(s)

Dimethacrylate/carboxylic
monomers, multiple functional
acrylate monomers, water,
activator for chemical
activation

Polymerization by light- and
chemical-activation and acid–
base reaction

Fluoroaluminosilicate glass,
nonreactive filler, reactive
monomers

Nonreactive filler, methacrylate- Light-activated polymerization
modified polyalkanoic acid,
and acid–base reaction
water-soluble methacrylate
monomer, water

Epoxy

Methenamine, titania, silver

Bisphenol A, epichlorohydrin
resin

Chemical crosslinking
polymerization of epoxide

Root canal sealing

Tri-/dicalcium silicate

Tri-/dicalcium silicate and
radiopaque powder

Water-based liquid

Hydration with liquid

Pulpal protection,
periradicular contact,
endodontic sealing

Base Paste

Catalyst Paste

Reaction Type

Indications

Fluoroaluminosilicate glass,
metallic oxides, sodium
fluoride, chemical- and/or
light-activated initiator(s)

Dimethacrylate/carboxylic
monomers, multiple functional
acrylate monomers water,
activator (for chemical cure)

Light or chemical activation of
polymerization and acid–base
reaction

Cavities in deciduous
teeth, cervical cavities in
adults, anterior proximal
restorations in adults, small
load-bearing restorations in
adults, temporary

Methacrylate monomers,
fillers, light-activated
initiator(s)

Methacrylate monomers,
fillers, activator (for chemical
cure)

Polymerization by light
and chemical activation, or
chemical activation only

Polymethyl methacrylate
polymer beads

Liquid 1: Methacrylate
monomers Liquid 2: Catalyst

Chemical-activated
polymerization

Disalicylate

Butyl ethylene glycol salicylate
resin, bismuth oxide

Resimpol natural resin, 13%
“MTA” (tri-/dicalcium silicate
and tricalcium aluminate?),
titania and silica

Chemical-activated
polymerization

Endodontic sealing

Disalicylate

Glycol disalicylate, titanium
dioxide and barium sulfate,
titania, zinc oxide

Ethyl toluene sulfonamide,
calcium hydroxide, zinc oxide,
zinc stearate

Chemical-activated
polymerization

Pulp capping

Epoxy

Bisphenol-A epoxy resin,
bisphenol-F epoxy resin,
calcium tungstate, zirconium
oxide, silica, iron-oxide
pigments

Dibenzydiamine,
aminoadamantane,
tricyclodecane-diamine,
calcium tungstate, zirconium
oxide, silica, silicone oil

Chemical-activated
polymerization

Endodontic sealing

Resin-modified glass
ionomer (hybrid ionomer)

Two-Paste Systems
Materials
Compomer

Resin cement

Metal, lithium disilicate,
alumina or zirconia
prostheses,* metal posts/
core

Ceramic veneers, Maryland
bridges, lithium disilicate,
alumina, zirconia, cores and
posts

CHAPTER 7

TABLE 7-1

Dental Cements

131

Overview of Dental Cements—cont’d

Single Component
Materials

Paste or Liquid

Reaction Type

Indications

Compomer

Methacrylate monomer,
acidic monomer,
fluoroaluminosilicate glass,
initiator

Light-activated polymerization

Cavities in deciduous teeth,
cervical cavities in adults,
anterior proximal restorations
in adults, small load-bearing
restorations in adults,
temporary

Varnish

Resins, organic solvent
(acetone); chloroform ether
may include silver, fluoride, or
calcium compounds

Evaporation of solvent

Pulp protection, surficial ion
release for caries prevention
or remineralization

Inert

Methacrylate monomers,
initiator, ceramic fillers

Light-activated polymerization

Cementing ceramic
restorations or orthodontic
brackets

Tri-/dicalcium silicate

Methacrylate monomers,
initiators, tri-/dicalcium
silicate, barium zirconate

Light-activated polymerization

Pulp-capping, pulpotomies

Tri-/dicalcium silicate

Organic liquid, tri-/dicalcium
silicate, radiopaque powder

Hydration in vivo

Pulpotomies, endodontic
sealing

Calcium hydroxide

Iodoform, silicone, calcium
hydroxide

Nonsetting

Primary tooth pulpectomy

Tri-/dicalcium silicate

Tricalcium silicate, salicylate
resin, titanium oxide, calcium
tungstate

Nonsetting

Primary tooth pulpectomy

EBA, ethoxybenzoic acid.
*
Don’t use for anterior because of opacity.

reaction with water that is either included in two-part systems or
absorbed from the tooth. The exception is the nonsetting materials used with primary teeth after a pulpectomy, where a cement
should not interfere with exfoliation.
Long-term retention of devices is important for crowns and
bridges. However, temporary cements are sometimes needed,
for instance, when transient devices are placed during prosthetic
treatments. Dental cements are crucial for orthodontic brackets
and bands, but the durability of these materials can be less than
other cements because orthodontic treatments usually last about
2 years. Sealants and cements to reduce sensitivity (by occluding
exposed dentinal tubules) are not expected to last long term.

Performance Criteria for Dental Cements
Dental cements must solidify into a biocompatible mass in the
oral cavity and function over time in vivo by resisting hydrolysis (degradation by water). Properties of dental cements vary, but
those that are often compared include the mixing time, working
time, setting time, film thickness, compressive strength, and
vulnerability to acid. Requirements for dental cements (base/
liner and luting materials) have been codified in International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) Standards 9917-1 and
9917-2 (Dentistry−Water-Based Cements) and ISO 6876:2012
(Root Canal Sealing Materials), where the test methods for these
properties are described. These standards apply to water-based luting cement, bases, linings, restorations, core buildup materials,
and root canal sealing. See Table 7-2 for the requirements. Except

for root canal sealers, cements should set in less than 8 minutes
(min) and resist acid erosion.

Solubility and Disintegration of Cements
Cements are often placed supragingivally and exposed to a variety
of acids produced by microorganisms or as components of foods
and drinks. ISO 9917-1 describes the erosion test of impinging a
0.1-M solution of lactic acid/sodium lactate (pH = 2.74) on waterbased cements. The depth of erosion after 24 hours (h) is measured
as mm/h. The results show that the rate of erosion decreased from
conventional GIC to hybrid GIC to compomer. The solubility
procedure described in ISO 4049 for dental composites uses the
weight (mg) and volume (mm3) of the specimen before immersion
in water and the weight of the specimen after 5 days of immersion,
and then desiccation. The solubility is calculated by dividing the
weight changes by the volume. ISO 6876 for endodontic sealers
measures the weight of the specimen before 24 h of immersion in
water, and the weight percentage of residue is reported.
Testing conditions have been shown to significantly influence the solubility, such as varying the pH, the electrolytic concentration of the storage media, the soaking or impingement of
a test medium on the cement, the powder-to-liquid (P/L) ratio
of the cement, and the testing duration. For example, lowering
the pH and P/L ratio will generally increase solubility. Delaying
exposure to a storage medium decreases solubility. Some cements
show no solubility (by weight) when concurrent dissolution and
water sorption occur. Therefore poor correlation has been found

132

PA RT I I

TABLE 7-2

Direct Restorative Materials

ISO Requirements

ISO 9917-1 Water-Based Cements—Part 1: Powder/Liquid Acid-Base Cements

Zn PHOSPHATE

Zn POLYCARBOXYLATE

GLASS IONOMER

Cement Type

Luting

Liner or Base

Luting

Liner or Base

Luting

Liner or Base

Maximum mixing time (min)

2.5

2

2.5

2

1.5

1.5

Final setting time (min)

8

6

8

6

8

6

Maximum film thickness (μm)

25

nr

25

nr

25

nr

Minimum compressive strength (MPa)

50

Maximum acid erosion (mm)

0.3

0.4

0.17

ISO 9917-2 Water-Based Cements—Part 2: Resin-Modified Cements

Cement Use

Luting

Liner or Base

Restorative

Minimum working time (min)

1.5

1.5

1.5

Minimum setting time (min)

8

6

6

Maximum film thickness (μm)

25

nr

Minimum flexural strength (MPa)

10

10

25

ISO 6876 Root Canal Sealing Materials/ADA 57 Endodontic Sealing Materials

Property

Requirement

Flow (mm)

>17

Working time

To be stated by manufacturer in minutes or hours

Setting time

To be stated by manufacturer in minutes or hours

Maximum film thickness (μm)

50

Solubility (%)

<3

Radiopacity (mm of equivalent Al)

>3

Dimensional stability (ADA 57 only)

<0.1% expansion, less than 1% shrinkage

ADA, American Dental Association; nr, no requirement.

for solubility data from the acidic-erosion and passive-weight-loss
tests. In vitro data show that cement solubility differs among categories of materials and products. For the cements that rely on
water to set, the solubility increases from glass ionomer to zinc
phosphate and polycarboxylate cements. The solubilities between
zinc polycarboxylate cement and zinc phosphate cement were not
significantly different when mixed as recommended. However, a
reduction in the powder-to-liquid ratio for zinc polycarboxylate
reduced the viscosity and produced a cement that disintegrated
rapidly. Zinc phosphate cements have a relatively low solubility
in water; however, in vivo disintegration occurs with the lactic,
acetic, and citric acids present in foods.
With solubility being inversely proportional to the resin content, resin cements are the least soluble of all dental cements,
especially hydrophobic resins. The low solubility of resin cement
makes this material suitable for cementing all-ceramic or resinbased restorations, where more cement may be exposed compared
with metal or metal-ceramic restorations. Polymerizing monomers
in glass-ionomer cements (RMGIs) have reduced the solubility
compared with GIC.
The durability of some cements has been tested by placing
small specimens of the cements in intraoral appliances that can

be removed from the mouth to measure the loss of material.
In one study, cements were inserted in tiny wells placed in the
proximal surfaces of cast crown restorations. These crowns were
cemented with temporary ZOE cement. After 1 year, the crowns
were removed, and the cement loss was measured. GIC degraded
the least, followed by zinc polycarboxylate cement, zinc phosphate cement, and zinc polycarboxylate cement mixed in a lower
P/L ratio.
The solubilities of endodontic sealers based on ZOE and early
formulations of glass ionomer were near the maximum allowed
in ISO specifications (3%). ZOE-based root canal sealers have
been used successfully for decades in endodontics, despite their
high solubility. Sealers with epoxy or polyvinyl siloxane (PVS)
bases have significantly lower solubility among endodontic sealers. The tri-/dicalcium silicate cements do not meet this limit after
24 hours; however, after longer times, these materials become less
soluble. Immediately after setting, the tri-/dicalcium silicates have
calcium hydroxide on the surface, which is beneficial for bioactivity but appears as solubility. Nevertheless, the tricalcium silicate
sealers are highly successful clinically.
The variety of dental cements encompasses many material categories, and the properties vary widely, as discussed herein.

CHAPTER 7

80

The anticariogenic potential of silicate cement confirms the ability
of F– to inhibit demineralization and lead to the development of
several fluoride-containing restorative materials and cements: conventional glass ionomers, resin-modified glass ionomers, polyacidmodified composites (compomers), and fluoridated varnishes. For
the fluorosilicate glass-based materials, fluoride is first dissolved
in the matrix from the glass during the acid–base reaction, and
then released to the oral cavity. For fluoridated varnishes, the fillers incorporated in the material dissolve partially upon contact
with saliva, and then F– is released from the varnishes. The rate
of fluoride release depends on the cement matrix, porosity, and
nature of the fluoridated filler (i.e., type, amount, particle, and
size). Figure 7-1 illustrates the typical behavior of fluoride release
from dental materials.
In vitro data have shown that fluoride release from GIC
remains detectable for years, although the rate of release is reduced
by a factor of 10 within the first few months (Figure 7-1, A). The
release rate and duration depend on the cement matrix; porosity;
and the fluoridated filler’s type, amount, silanation, and particle
size. Figure 7-1, B & C illustrate the typical behavior of fluoride
release from dental materials.

70

Clinical Significance
In vitro studies have shown that fluoride-releasing restoratives
inhibit the enamel and dentin demineralization produced by
acidic gels or demineralizing buffer solutions. The inhibition of
enamel demineralization reached up to 7 mm from the edge of
the material. These results were confirmed by microradiographic
assessments of the lesion depth of artificial caries and the mineral
density of enamel adjacent to a conventional and a resin-modified
glass-ionomer. For both materials, lesion depth increased, and
mineral density decreased, with increasing distance (1 to 3 mm)
from the restoration margin.
Fluoride release varies between categories of material and brands
and is influenced by the material and the material’s setting mechanisms, the fluoride content, and the testing conditions. Clinical
studies have not clearly shown whether the initial burst or longterm release of F ions is clinically more important to prevent caries. Despite the proven effects from in vitro studies, clinical studies

60
50
40
30
20

0

Recharge

0

25

50

A

75

100

125

100

125

10

12

Time (d)
700

Cumulative release (mg/cm2)

Fluoride-release studies usually are conducted in vitro, where the
experimental conditions are controlled and the fluoride release
is easier to measure. Also, the intrinsic characteristics of the
material—such as formulas, filler compositions, ratios of component mixing, mixing procedure, and curing time—can be studied
more easily. For such in vitro tests, the protocols have varied in
terms of the composition and pH of storage media, the frequency
of the storage solution change, and plaque and pellicle formation.
When the demineralization–remineralization cycling is used
in in vitro studies, higher fluoride release is observed in acids.
However, ion-enriched (ions other than F−) storage media, such as
artificial saliva, reduce the release of fluoride and surface coatings
from human saliva. The presence of esterase or hydrolases in the
storage media or on the surface of the material increases fluoride
release. Although removal of the outer layer of the material by air
polishing or finishing can lead to higher release, toothbrushing has
not been found to affect fluoride release.

133

10

600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0

25

50

B

75

Time (d)
700

Cumulative release (mg/cm2)

Factors Affecting Fluoride Release in Vitro

Release rate (mg/d.cm2)

Fluoride-Releasing Materials

Dental Cements

600
500
400
300
200
100
0

C

0

2

4

6

8

Square root of time (d0.5)

• Figure 7-1 Typical fluoride-release profiles. A, Release rate versus time;
the spike reflects fluoride recharging, and the blue dotted line represents the
fluoride release where no recharging has occurred. B, Cumulative release
over time; the diamonds are experimental data of (A) without recharging,
and the curve is the best-fit curve of Y (total release) = a + b • (time){1/2}.
C, The same data in (B) plotted against the square root of time, revealing
a linear relationship. The effect of recharging is not shown in (B) or (C).

134

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

conflict as to whether these materials sufficiently prevent or inhibit
recurrent caries compared with nonfluoridated restoratives. Further
clinical studies, preferably in split-mouth designs, are needed to evaluate the impact of fluoride-releasing restoratives on recurrent caries
development and progression, especially in patient groups that have
limited access to or low compliance with prophylactic measures.
An in situ study compared the effectiveness of a conventional
GIC, an RMGI, a compomer, and a fluoridated composite for
resistance to enamel lesion formation using intraoral appliances
embedded with these materials. Intraoral appliances were worn by
the subjects for 4 weeks without additional application of topical
fluorides. The results showed that only one ion-releasing material led to significantly lower lesion depth and mineral loss. No
other materials had a preventive effect on recurrent caries. Clinical
studies of fluoride-releasing composites often show no differences
in the occurrence of recurrent caries.

Fluoride Recharge
Dental restoratives are frequently exposed to exogenous sources
of fluoride, such as fluoridated dentifrices, mouth rinses, fluoride
gels, and varnishes. These released fluoride ions can be absorbed
by the dental restoratives to “recharge” with fluoride. A common
recharging method is exposing the restorative to a concentrated
fluoride agent such as 0.02% NaF solution (90 ppm) or 1.23%
(12,300 ppm) acidulated phosphate fluoride (APF) solution for 4
to 5 min, although treatments up to 1 hour have been reported.
Recharging is more effective with acidic fluoridating agents, such
as APF. However, APF is known to cause surface damage of some
restorative materials. The ability of a restorative material to be
recharged and serve as a fluoride reservoir depends on the type and
permeability of the material, the frequency of fluoride exposure,
and the concentration of the fluoridating agent. Glass ionomers,
resin-modified glass ionomers, and compomers are recharged
more easily than composite resin-based materials. In vivo fluoride
recharging is influenced by saliva and plaque. The higher viscosity of saliva reduces the diffusion of ions in and out of the material. The formation of a surface pellicle is a barrier hampering the
recharging process. The release data for recharged materials is significantly higher in the first 24 hours but decreases within several
days to the preexposure level (Figure 7-1, A), suggesting that the
initial release may occur partly by washout of fluoride ions retained
on the surface or in the pores of the material. The level of release
after recharging depends on the concentration of the recharging
medium and the duration of treatment.

metallic material is used to restore the tooth, discomfort may arise
from hot or cold nutrition or galvanic contact with metal restoratives on opposing dentition. During restorative procedures, the
acidic components of some dental cements may irritate the pulp
before setting. Therefore pulp protectants are required when little
protective dentin is left after a cavity preparation.
Pulp protectants for cavity preparations approximating the
pulp are denoted as pulp-capping materials, varnishes, cavity liners, or base materials. Pulp-capping materials are in direct contact
with the pulp, and their biocompatibility is crucial to the pulp’s
healing. Varnishes as very thin resin layers used to plug and block
the dentinal tubules exposed in a cavity preparation. Cavity liners
are thin layers and are used for indirect pulp capping when the
remaining dentin is less than 1 mm and are more protective than
varnishes. Base materials are placed in thicker layers than liners
and are commonly placed farther from the pulp. The base material
is needed for insulation from the thermal, chemical, or galvanic
irritations that may occur with restorative materials.

Pulp-Capping Materials
Pulp-capping agents are used when the pulp has been exposed
and bleeding is frank. The best pulp-capping and cavity-liner
materials are bioactive and antimicrobial. Bioactivity, as defined
in ISO 22317, is the spontaneous formation of a thin layer rich
in Ca and P, similar to hydroxyapatite, on the surface of a material
in vivo or synthetic body fluid. Bioactivity occurs by the release
of calcium and hydroxide ions that create a high pH (alkaline),
thus causing the precipitation of calcium phosphate from the
supersaturated body fluids in the vicinity of their surface. Bone
morphogenic protein (BMP) and transforming growth factorbeta one (TGF-β1) may be solubilized from the bone or dentine
by the high pH and released to stimulate repair. The pulp can
heal by forming pulpal odontoblasts on the calcium phosphate
layer of the bioactive materials, forming reparative dentin. Such a
histological result is shown in Figure 7-2. Bioactive pulp-capping

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the benefit of calcium hydroxide in contact with pulpal tissue?

Pulp Protection
Tooth enamel is a translucent crystalline bioceramic but is vulnerable to acids and the repeated stress of a lifetime of chewing. The
underlying dentin may be exposed to the oral cavity when the
enamel is worn, chemically eroded by acidic foods or cariogenic
bacteria, mechanically abraded by food or opposing teeth, fractured, or prepared for restoration. Depending on the remaining
dentin thickness, the exposed dentinal tubules provide a communication path to the pulp for acids and microbiological insults.
The dentin must be covered to minimize further damage. When

• Figure 7-2 Reactionary dentin. Histological section of a human tooth
submitted to a slight pathological stimulus from a deep cavity filled with
light-cured glass-ionomer cement, and then extracted 30 days after the
procedure. The remaining dentin thickness is 287 μm at the thinnest region. Note that the pulp tissue subjacent to the continuous odontoblast
layer (hollow arrows) does not show inflammation. (Courtesy Dr. Carlos
Alberto de Souza Costa.)

CHAPTER 7

Dental Cements

135

agents include calcium hydroxide powder and tri-/dicalcium silicate materials.

The properties and applications of tri-/dicalcium silicate will be
discussed in more detail later in the chapter.

Calcium Hydroxide
Calcium hydroxide medicaments are available as powder, onepaste, or two-paste products with radiopaque fillers. Calcium
hydroxide powder may simply be mixed with water and placed,
or some products disperse the powder in a carrier such as polyethylene glycol liquid, such as UltraCal (Ultradent Inc.). Other
products may include calcium hydroxide in a resin formula that
sets chemically or with light, such as Dycal (Caulk Dentsply
Sirona). Calcium hydroxide is sparingly soluble in water and does
not set into a hardened cement during the procedure but gradually converts to calcium carbonate by carbon dioxide in the blood
and oral fluids over time. Such products must not be left on the
margins of the cavity preparation; otherwise, the margin will not
be properly sealed. Calcium hydroxide is beneficial because of a
high pH, which makes this material antimicrobial. However, calcium hydroxide alone does not set or provide much thermal insulation but is bioinert. Histologically, calcium hydroxide stimulates
reparative dentin when placed on the pulp, although the reparative dentin may have tunnel defects.

Formocresol and Ferric Sulfate
Formocresol and ferric sulfate have been used as protective medicaments for partial or complete pulpotomy procedures, among
other techniques, including electrosurgery and laser cautery. Ferric sulfate and formocresol staunch the bleeding pulp, but neither
material is bioactive. By far, formocresol has been the most popular
among pediatric dentists. Ferric sulfate–treated pulpotomies have
led to the unfortunate consequence of root resorption. Calcium
hydroxide has not been popular in pediatric dentistry because this
material has been less successful with pulpal inflammation and
tooth resorption in small, thin primary teeth. The bioactive tricalcium silicate–based products are superseding the use of formocresol or ferric sulfate medicaments for pediatric pulpotomies, with a
better success rate for retention before exfoliation.
Pediatric pulpotomies may fail or may not be suitable because
of deeper infection of the pulp. For these cases, the pulp is extirpated, and the canal is filled with a nonsetting medicament. The
filling material is nonsetting to avoid interference with the primary tooth’s exfoliation. These materials should be radiopaque.
Two such materials contain calcium hydroxide in silicone oil or
tricalcium silicate powder in salicylate resin.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is MTA cement biocompatible and considered bioactive?

Tri-/Dicalcium Silicate
Tri-/dicalcium silicate (tricalcium silicate, for short) products are
also known by the names mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA),
calcium silicate, biosilicates, or bioceramics. Chemically, the predominant compounds in these cements are tricalcium silicate and
dicalcium silicate powders with inert radiopaque ceramic powders.
The tricalcium silicate powders are unique ceramic compounds
because they set with water and form calcium hydroxide as a reaction product within a hard matrix of hydrated tri- and dicalcium
silicate. The calcium hydroxide reaction product renders bioactivity and imparts antimicrobial properties. Furthermore, because
the calcium hydroxide is within a matrix, the alkalinity is sustained
longer than in calcium hydroxide alone. This type of cement is
thermally insulating and seals very well, without shrinkage.
For pulpotomies, hemorrhage should be controlled with a
cotton pellet moistened with saline, a dilute solution of sodium
hypochlorite (0.5% to 1.0%) before placement, to avoid blood
seeping into the cement and ensure removal of enough affected
pulp. The consistency of the tricalcium silicate can be fluid or
putty-like for pulpal placement. After placement, any restorative
material, including ZOE, GIC, hybrid ionomer liner, or flowable
compomer or composite, can be placed immediately over the tricalcium silicate without waiting for a full set of tricalcium silicates. Bonding agents do not adhere to tricalcium silicates, and
etching should not be performed directly on tricalcium silicates.
The precipitation of hydroxyapatite at interfaces with the tissue
should prevent the tricalcium silicates from being dislodged. After
pulpotomy treatment, the pulp should be periodically assessed for
vitality, as an indication of a dentinal barrier forming beneath the
tricalcium silicate cement. Tricalcium silicates have been added to
the resin matrix as pulp protectant, such as TheraCal and TheraCal PT (Bisco). These products set by light curing or dual curing
of the resin, but their bioactivity is lessened by the resin encapsulation of the bioactive component.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the purpose of using cavity varnishes, and why is copal varnish no
longer used as often as it was during the 1960s through 1990?

Cavity Varnishes and Liners
When the remaining dentin thickness is less than 1 mm, irritants
must be prevented from reaching the pulp through the dentinal
tubules by placing a protective layer. The classic pulp protectant is
a cavity varnish, which prevents pulpal irritation by occluding the
exposed dentinal tubules.
Varnishes are solutions of synthetic resins or natural gums, such
as copal or rosins, in an organic solvent (ethanol, acetone, chloroform, or ether). The varnish is applied as a thin coating on the
dentin, which forms a coherent layer as the solvent evaporates in
about 30 seconds. At least two layers of varnish should be applied to
obtain a complete, continuous coating with few pinholes. Each varnish layer should be thoroughly dried before proceeding. Varnishes
are applied with a disposable brush or a small pledget of cotton. For
infection control, a used varnish applicator should not be inserted
in a varnish bottle; hence, unit-dose containers are common.
Additional cavity-liner products include low-viscosity ZOE,
glass ionomer, calcium hydroxide products, and the tricalcium silicates. Calcium hydroxide–containing products are preferred for
cavity lining, for the same reason as the pulp-capping materials:
bioactivity. Some liners adhere to the tooth, enhancing their ability to seal the dentinal tubules. Glass ionomers are less desirable in
the vicinity of the pulp because of their acidity, but resin-modified
glass ionomers are used. Varnish is not indicated or needed when
adhesive materials are selected for restorations. The resin bonding
systems serve the same role as varnish.

Fluoridated Varnishes
Varnishes containing fluoride are applied superficially on teeth.
Varnishes reduce sensitivity by occluding dentinal tubules and

136

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

provide fluoride release. Typically, these varnishes contain 5%
sodium fluoride to elute fluoride ions, although others contain
calcium fluoride or amorphous calcium phosphate. Varnish films
are temporarily effective but must be reapplied for caries prevention at hygiene appointments. Superficial varnishes are often flavored for patient acceptance (Figure 7-3, left).
Silver nitrate has a long history of use to arrest caries. Later,
a Japanese researcher developed a 38% silver diammine fluoride
solution for arresting caries and reducing dentinal sensitivity
(Figure 7-3, right). The silver ions are dissolved in an ammonia solution, which can attack and kill bacteria. The term silver diammine fluoride (SDF) has been accepted in dentistry for
AgF • (NH3)2. SDF solutions contain twice the fluoride present in
a 5% NaF varnish. This solution will arrest caries by precipitating
the silver ions but will darken carious lesions with silver precipitates. Darkening of the tooth can be alleviated by using a potassium iodide solution after application of the SDF. This material
is convenient to use for the medically compromised or bedridden
and primary teeth, despite the discoloration.

Cement Bases
Cement bases are more distant from the pulp and placed at the
bottom of cavity preparations. Bases provide thermal or galvanic
insulation (Chapter 3, Clinical Significance of Galvanic Currents), although eliminating communication to the pulp is also
important. Being farther from the pulp allows some acidic materials to be used, such as zinc phosphate cement. Zinc phosphate
cement has been an effective base material because this cement
is thermally insulating but has a low pH (acidity) and therefore
requires another material under the cement to protect the pulp.

When mixed as a base, zinc phosphate cement should be kept cool
and mixed to a thick, nontacky, putty-like consistency that slows
the reaction and minimizes free acid on the surface when placed.
ZOE, zinc polycarboxylate, fast-setting glass ionomers, calcium
hydroxide, and tricalcium silicate cements have been used as cavity bases. All these cements contain ceramic powders, which inherently have lower thermal and electrical conductivity than metals
(Table 7-3). Heat transfer is a complex phenomenon that depends
on the material’s heat capacity, thickness, and density (Chapter 3,
Thermal Properties).
Cement bases should be strong enough to withstand condensation forces during placement of restorative materials, especially
amalgam, and the forces during mastication or bruxing. Table 7-4
shows the compressive strength of representative dental cements
over 24 hours. For most dental cements, the strength increases
rapidly over 30 min and keeps increasing on the first day. Notably,
the tricalcium silicate cements mature by hydration more slowly
and gain their strength over 1 month, but especially during the
first week. The minimum strength required of base materials to
resist masticatory forces has not been determined because of the
complexity and the influence of the design of the prepared tooth
cavity. However, a study of amalgam restorations placed over a

TABLE 7-3

Material

Approximate Thermal Conductivity
(mcal/cm-s-K)

Dentin

1–2.3

Enamel

1.6–2.2

Tricalcium silicate
cement

0.7

Glass

2–2.5

Zinc phosphate cement

2.5–3.1

Zinc oxide–eugenol

4.0

Amalgam

5.4

Stainless steel

38

Gold

740

TABLE 7-4

Compressive Strength of Cement Base
Materials

Material

7 Min (MPa)

30 Min (MPa)

24 Hours (MPa)

2.8

3.5

5.2

6.2

6.9

12.4

15.9

20.7

24.1

Calcium
hydroxide

3.8

4.8

10.3

7.6

6.2

8.3

Tricalcium
silicate

~0

Not determined

14–40

Zinc
phosphate

6.9

86.9

119.3

Zinc oxide–
eugenol

• Figure 7-3 Flavored fluoride varnish for surface application to teeth, especially primary teeth (left), and silver diammine fluoride solution cleared in
the United States for sensitivity treatments, used off-label for caries treatment (right). (Courtesy Elevate Oral Care.)

Thermal Conductivity of Cement Base and
Reference Materials

CHAPTER 7

hard-setting calcium hydroxide base showed no evidence of failure, even though the strength of the material was only about
10 MPa after 1 day. For a class I tooth preparation where the base
is supported on all sides by tooth structure, less strength is necessary than is required for class II preparations.

CRITICAL QUESTION
During the initial seating of a three-unit fixed partial denture (bridge), the
prosthesis fits the prepared tooth perfectly and appears to be retained on
the tooth so tenaciously that removal requires a great deal of force. Why is
cement required for retention under this condition?

Cements for Luting
The first zinc oxide–based cement for cementing fixed prostheses
was not adhesive to the tooth or metal prostheses. The cement
functioned by filling the microscopic space between the device
and the tooth and hardening to a high cohesive mass, which prevented dislodgement (Figure 7-4). The mechanical retention is

• Figure 7-4 Diagram of the suggested mechanism through which a
dental cement provides mechanical retention of a gold crown. The cement penetrates irregularities in the tooth structure and the casting. Upon
hardening, these retentive sites aid in retaining the cast crown in place.
The enlargement shows a fracture through the cement, resulting in dislodgment of the crown.

Dental Cements

137

obtained by the combination of the microscopically rough tooth
and prosthesis surfaces, along with the rigid cement that fills the
gaps. This mechanical retention is referred to as luting, where zinc
phosphate is the dominating cement. The degree of cement retentiveness for a given restoration relies on many factors: prepared
tooth form, height, number of abutments, accuracy of superstructure fit, distribution of the cement, and occlusion. Dental
prostheses that are mechanically retained include the following:
(1) fixed prosthodontics made of metal, ceramic-veneered metal,
or ceramic; (2) temporary restorations; (3) pins and posts used
for retention of restorations; and (4) implant superstructures. As
discussed in Chapter 6, Luting Agents, luting traditionally refers
to the use of nonadhesive materials for retaining prostheses, and
bonding refers to the use of adhesive bonding materials. The distinction has faded in the literature; the use of adhesive bonding
medium is also referred to as luting.
When a device is seated without a luting agent, point contacts
are made between the tooth and the appliance (Figure 7-5A & B).
The cement is used to fill the areas that are not in contact. The
cement prevents oral fluid from flowing between the surfaces,
thereby preventing bacterial invasion. Luting of a device to a tooth
requires a cement of low viscosity and low contact angle to the
tooth and the appliance to form a continuous film (Figure 7-5, C),
without the formation of voids at interface (Figure 7-5, D). Voids
impair the cement’s ability to support and retain a prosthesis.
Porosity in powder-liquid cements is created from incorporating air while mixing powder into liquid. One study with luting agents showed that the method of mixing had no influence
on the formation of small pores, but hand mixing yielded more
large pores than triturator mixing. Porosity measurement of handmixed powder-to-liquid cements showed that polycarboxylate
cement had the highest porosity, followed by zinc phosphate and
GICs. Higher viscosity generally leads to more pores during mixing. If air bubbles are entrapped, masticatory forces may fracture
weak appliances such as veneers. When a void-free layer is formed
and hardens, one surface is wedged against another to resist the
shearing stresses that might dislodge the appliance.
To choose a cement for attaching a fixed prosthesis, the key
characteristics are the working time, setting time, consistency,
ease of removal of excess material, and adhesion. Any cement

A

B

C

D

• Figure 7-5 Schematic illustration of the abutment–prosthesis interfaces. A, Irregular surface morphology of the two surfaces to be bonded. B, Two surfaces pressed against each other without an intermediate
layer. Note the small number of points of contact illustrated by the circles. C, Continuous interface when a
third material, either cement or adhesive, is used as the intermediate layer. D, Voids generated as a result
of the inability of the intermediate layer to wet the surfaces completely.

138

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

for attachment must flow under pressure and wet (spread over)
the tooth and prosthetic surfaces. The internationally accepted
requirements for luting cements are shown in Tables 7-2. Luting cements are required to have a film thickness less than 25 μm
when tested according to American National Standards Institute
(ANSI)/American Dental Association (ADA) Specification No. 96
and ISO 9917-1 or 9917-2. For endodontic sealers, which are discussed later, the maximum film thickness is 50 μm per ISO 6876.
The film thickness essentially reflects the consistency of the cement
mixture and is affected by the size of particles and the P/L ratio.
The ISO film-thickness test method requires freshly mixed cement
to be placed between two optically flat surfaces, and a 150-N vertical load is applied. Seven minutes later, the thickness of the film is
measured. Such samples should appear to create continuous films.
The intaglio of a crown must be cleaned before the application
of luting cement. The interior surface should be carefully abraded
with a stone or sandblasted with alumina abrasive. Prolonged
sandblasting can deform metal margins or erode ceramic margins
and should be avoided. Crowns should be thoroughly rinsed to
remove debris and dried. Cementing a prosthesis to a tooth occurs
in three steps after the cement is mixed, if mixing is required:
cement placement, seating, and excess-cement removal.
After mixing, a luting cement should be as free of bubbles
as possible, and then placed in the intaglio of a crown or bridge
(Figure 7-6, A & B). The cement should coat the entire intaglio
surface but fill only a portion of the intaglio. Filling the entire

intaglio increases the risk for bubble entrapment, the time and
pressure needed for seating, and the time and effort required to
remove excess cement. A fixed prosthesis should be fully seated
with moderate finger pressure, displacing excess cement.
Cement thickness is not the same as film thickness but refers to
the actual thickness of the cement that occurs clinically between a
cast crown, inlay, onlay, or veneer and the tooth structure. Lowerviscosity cements make the seating process easier. Thinner cement
layers are created by applying sufficient seating force such that excess
cement is expressed at the margin. Tapping the crown or vibrating
the crown with an ultrasonic device may help achieve complete seating. Asking the patient to bite on a soft substance such as wood or
a cotton roll also helps complete seating and expels excess cement
(Figure 7-6, C). Three points on the margin should be examined
with an explorer to ensure seating was complete. The design of
the prosthesis should allow the cement to flow and create an even
layer of cement between the prosthetic device and the tooth. However, a higher taper of the tooth preparation (Figure 7-6, D) and
a lower crown height reduce retention. Cement thickness between
the prosthesis and the abutment should be thin to minimize pores,
maximize retention, and minimize plaque accumulation and microleakage between the device and the tooth.
Cement thickness plays a significant role in prosthesis retention. The thickness varies with (1) the amount of force applied
during seating of the prosthesis, (2) the direction in which the
force is applied to the prosthesis during seating, (3) the design
of the prosthesis relative to hindering or facilitating the flow of
cement, (4) the fit of the prosthesis on the prepared tooth, and (5)
the inherent film thickness of the cement. An acceptable cement
thickness value in the literature is between 25 and 150 μm.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does the technique of removing excess cement differ among the types
of cements?

A

B

C

D

• Figure 7-6 Mechanics of cementing a prosthesis. A, Assembly of a
fixed prosthesis and respective tooth preparation. B, Luting agent placed
in the prosthesis should cover the entire surface. C, Space for expelling excess cement decreases as the prosthesis reaches its final position. Arrows show the thickness of space for expelling excess cement.
D, Higher degree of the abutment taper provides a greater space for expelling excess cement.

Excess luting cement should be present at the margin of a
crown just after seating, an indication of complete cement coverage under the crown. The technique of removing excess cement
depends on the properties of the cement that should be described
in the instructions for use. A knotted dental floss should be run
through the interproximal regions immediately after complete
seating of the prosthesis to remove excess cement and create access
for cement removal required in other parts of the margin.
Aqueous-based cements mature after the setting and require
moisture, but not too much moisture. As a precaution, the clinician should apply a varnish coat (or a bonding agent) along the
accessible margin of cemented restorations before discharging the
patient. This coating should seal the margin, prevent dissolution,
and avoid infiltration by food or beverages during maturation,
and it may release fluoride.
A crown or bridge may be dislodged after the cement has
set if the cement fractures, dissolves, or erodes, which leaves a
space where plaque may accumulate, and caries may recur in the
marginal opening (Figure 7-7). Care must be exercised during luting to avoid this occurrence.

Zinc Oxide–Based Cements
The zinc oxide group of cements include zinc phosphate, zinc
carboxylate, and ZOE cements (Figure 7-8). Although they are
less popular today, understanding these cements enables one

CHAPTER 7

to appreciate the evolution of dental cements to contemporary
adhesives. The acid–base reaction never progresses to completion.
Therefore the hardened cements retain composite structure, unreacted powder particles in a matrix of reaction products.

Zinc Phosphate Cement
This cement’s powder contains zinc oxide (>75%) and as much
as 13% magnesia (magnesium oxide) and radiopaque powder.
The zinc oxide and magnesia may have been sintered, and then
ground into a fine powder; the sintering intimately combines the
two powders to control the setting rate. The finer the particle size,
the faster the cement sets, which is true for all the powder–liquid
reactions. Bismuth oxide is common as a radiopaque powder component in these cements. The water-based liquid contains phosphoric acid (38% to 59%), aluminum phosphate (2% to 3%),
and sometimes zinc phosphate (0% to 10%) to adjust the setting
reaction to a rate suitable for dentistry.

Critical Question
Explain why zinc phosphate cement should be mixed by increments on a cool
slab.

To mix zinc phosphate cement, the powder should be dispensed first on a cool glass mixing slab and divided into six increments, usually noted in the manufacturer’s instructions for use.
The temperature of the glass slab should be above the dew point

Dental Cements

139

of the room; otherwise, moisture condensed on the slab will dilute
the liquid, reducing the strength of the zinc phosphate cement.
Next, the liquid is dispensed just before mixing to minimize the
evaporation of water from the liquid. When the powder and liquid are mixed, the phosphoric acid solution (pH ~0.5) dissolves
the outer surface of the particle. The dissolved zinc ions react with
the aluminum phosphate ions in the liquid to precipitate a zinc
alumino-phosphate gel on the remaining undissolved zinc oxide
particles. The reaction between zinc oxide and phosphoric acid is
exothermic and requires a strict mixing protocol to control excess
heat generation. A small increment of powder is first mixed to
reduce the acidity of the liquid. Subsequent increments of powder
are added, and the heat also increases. Brisk spatulation for less
than 20 seconds is needed for each powder increment, with all
powder incorporated within 2 min to create a creamy mixture.
The heat must be dissipated properly by the cool glass slab; otherwise, the reaction will accelerate and shorten the working time.
Nonabsorbent paper pads should not be used. A test of “stringing”
the cement before use will indicate if the mixture is too viscous for
cementation.
After seating a prosthesis with a zinc phosphate cement, firm
pressure and a dry field are needed until the cement sets. Excess
cement in the interproximal area should be removed immediately
with a knotted dental floss after complete seating. The rest can
be removed after complete setting. Varnish or other nonpermeable coating should be applied at the margin to allow the cement
to mature isolated from the oral fluids. If a cavity liner has been
applied before the zinc phosphate cement, retention will be lower
because of the smooth liner surface with less interlocking.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why should freshly mixed zinc polycarboxylate cement be applied on the
tooth preparation before the cement loses its glossy appearance?

• Figure 7-7 Loss of cement at the marginal area resulting from exposure
to oral fluid.

Zinc Polycarboxylate Cement
Zinc polycarboxylate cement evolved from zinc phosphate and
was the first dental cement that chemically bonded to teeth. This
powder–liquid cement sets via an acid–base reaction of a powder
similar to that of zinc phosphate cement with a liquid based on
polyacrylic acids having a molecular weight of 30,000 to 50,000
Dalton. The acid concentration varies from 32% to 42% by weight.
Zinc polycarboxylate cements set by the acid-dissolving part of the
zinc oxide particles, which releases zinc, magnesium, and tin ions
that bind and crosslink the carboxyl groups. The polyacrylic acid
bonds to the zinc ions of the powder and to the calcium ions of
the mineralized tooth. A crosslinked polycarboxylate matrix phase

A
B
C
• Figure 7-8 Zinc oxide–based cement. A, Zinc-phosphate cement. B, Zinc polycarboxylate cement.
C, Polymer-reinforced zinc oxide–eugenol cement.

140

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

is formed, which encapsulates the unreacted portion of the particles, as with zinc phosphate cement. Stannous fluoride may be a
minor component to modify the setting time, raise the strength,
and enhance manipulative properties. The fluoride released from
such zinc carboxylate is minor compared with that released from
the glass-ionomer cements discussed later.
The powder may be refrigerated, which will retard the reaction.
However, the liquid should not be refrigerated because this will
cause it to thicken. Polycarboxylate cements are mixed at about
1.5:1 powder:liquid by weight on a nonabsorbent surface. The
powder should be incorporated into the liquid to create a glossy
mixture, indicative of carboxylic acid on the surface for bonding
to the tooth. A cool slab can be used to lengthen the working time
for zinc carboxylate cement, even though the reaction is not exothermic; however, a cool slab thickens the polyacrylic acid, which
hinders mixing.
A meticulously clean tooth surface is necessary to achieve adhesion and ensure intimate contact between the polycarboxylate
cement and the tooth. Application of a 10% polyacrylic or maleic
acid solution (10 to 15 seconds) should precede cement application, followed by rinsing with water. After cleansing, the abutment
should be isolated and blotted dry to prevent contamination by oral
fluids. Drying with an air syringe is acceptable, although the patient
may experience discomfort if a vital tooth is not anesthetized. The
outer surface of a prosthesis should be coated carefully with a separating medium, such as petroleum jelly. The separating medium
prevents excess polycarboxylate cement from adhering to the crown
so that excess cement can be removed when the cement hardens.
The working time for polycarboxylate cement is much shorter
than for zinc phosphate cement, approximately 2.5 versus 5 min;
therefore rapid spatulation and prompt seating are necessary to
ensure a low cement thickness. The pH of the cement liquid is initially very low (1.7) but higher than that of zinc phosphate, and it
rises rapidly as the setting reaction proceeds. During setting, polycarboxylate cement passes through a rubbery stage. Excess cement
should not be removed during this stage because the cement can
be pulled out from the margins, leaving a void. The setting time
ranges from 6 to 8 min as required in ISO 9917-1. Because of
the short working time, only crowns or short bridge spans can be
cemented with zinc polycarboxylate cement. The adhesive acrylic
bonds create a cement that can withstand thermal cycling, unlike
zinc phosphate cement.

cement: (1) temporary cementation, (2) long-term cementation
of fixed prostheses, (3) temporary fillings and thermal insulating
bases, and (4) intermediate restorations. ZOE cements are also
used as root canal sealers and periodontal dressings. Temporary
ZOE restorations are expected to last a few weeks. The antimicrobial attribute of ZOE is a benefit compared with glass-ionomer
cements or resin composites. However, ZOE cements can cause
pulpal necrosis; therefore ZOE should not be used directly on
pulp. Indirectly used, ZOE has a sedative effect by sealing the
dentinal tubules against the ingress of oral fluids until a more permanent restoration can be fabricated and cemented.
Intermediate-duration ZOE cements serve as a restorative material for about 1 year. To achieve the properties necessary for this
use, a stiff, putty-like restorative consistency must be used (high P/L
ratio). The higher the P/L ratio, the faster the material sets. A cool
glass mixing slab slows the setting, which should be above the dew
point to avoid moisture condensation and dilution of the cement.
An excellent application for these ZOE cements is for temporary or provisional (short-term or intermediate-term) luting of
provisional fixed prosthodontics. Long-term ZOE luting cements
are somewhat difficult to manipulate because their film thicknesses are high, and excess cement is difficult to remove; therefore
long-term ZOE luting cements should never be used for temporary cementation. ZOE cement is used for implant superstructure
cementation, where more retentive cements could lead to damage
of the supporting implant if retrieval is required. The consequence
of the less adhesive cement is potential loosening of the implant
prosthesis.
To improve the strength of ZOE cements, part of the eugenol
liquid has been replaced by orthoethoxybenzoic acid and alumina
added to the powder. Another system, called polymer-reinforced
ZOE, incorporates a powder containing 20 to 40 wt% fine polymer particles and zinc oxide particles treated with carboxylic acid.
Residual eugenol is thought to interfere with the proper polymerization of resin-based composites or cements; therefore some
carboxylic acids have been used to replace eugenol and produce
a ZOE-like material. Such products are called zinc oxide–noneugenol cements. The compressive strength of these improved ZOE
cements is acceptable, but their strength values are inferior to
those of glass-ionomer and resin cements (Table 7-4).

Zinc Oxide Eugenol and Noneugenol Cements
ZOE cements have been formulated as powder–liquid and twopaste systems. The powder–liquid combination contains zinc
oxide powder and eugenol liquid. The two-paste system includes
a base paste containing zinc oxide powder, and the eugenol is in
the accelerator (or catalyst). The ZOE setting reaction starts with
water present in the tooth or the eugenol solution hydrolyzing
the zinc oxide to form zinc hydroxide. The zinc hydroxide and
eugenol chelate and solidify. The reaction proceeds more rapidly
in a warm, humid environment, such as inside a tooth. When
zinc acetate dihydrate is included in the powder, the reaction is
faster; zinc acetate is more soluble than zinc oxide or hydroxide.
Acetic acid in the eugenol solution also accelerates the dissolution of zinc oxide. The setting reaction is slower for the other zinc
oxide cements. A wide variety of ZOE cements are available, with
compressive strengths ranging from 3 to 55 MPa. Finer powders
increase the strength of the resulting cement.
The versatility of ZOE is reflected in ISO 3107:2011 (ANSI/
ADA Standard No. 30), which lists four clinical types of ZOE

Glass polyalkenoate cement is the proper designation for specialized
glass powders that react with polyacrylic acid. However, glass ionomer, glass-ionomer cement, and GIC are recognized as acceptable
names within the dental profession. The glass-ionomer cements
are an improvement over the predecessor silicate cements because
they include the bonding mechanism found in the zinc carboxylate cement with glass powder. The result is a superior and versatile
material that is adherent, translucent, and fluoride releasing. GICs
have been used for (1) the esthetic restoration of anterior teeth
(e.g., class III and V sites), (2) adhesive cements for fixed prostheses and orthodontic appliances, (3) intermediate restorations, (4)
pit and fissure sealants, (5) cavity liners and bases, and (6) core
buildup materials. The GICs are classified by variations in powder
composition and particle size to achieve the desired function, as
follows:
Type I: Luting crowns, bridges, and orthodontic brackets
Type II a: Esthetic restorative cements
Type II b: Reinforced restorative cements
Type III: Lining cements and bases

Glass-Ionomer Cement

CHAPTER 7

Chemistry and Setting
The glass powders for GIC always contain silica, calcia, alumina,
fluoride, and other oxides (Table 7-5). Higher-atomic-number
metal oxides (baria, strontia) are included in the glass formulas
to increase radiopacity. During melting, the raw materials are
homogenized into an amorphous glassy mass at temperatures
between 1100° and 1500 °C. After the molten mass is quenched,
the glass is ground into a powder, with average particle sizes ranging from less than 10 to about 50 μm, depending on the indication. Coarser powders are used for restoratives, and finer particles
are used for cementing devices or pulpal protectant products.
These glass powders for polyalkenoate cements are soluble in the
polyacrylic acids.
The first aqueous GIC solutions contained 40% to 50% polyacrylic acid, but such liquids were viscous and had a short shelf
life because they gelled. Current glass-ionomer liquids contain
mixtures of copolymers of itaconic, maleic, or tricarboxylic acids
(Figure 7-9). Tartaric acid is used as a rate-controlling additive
in the GIC liquid to improve handling, decrease viscosity, and
increase working time. Tartaric acid also shortens the setting time
(Figure 7-10) by “sharpening” the setting curve and extends the
shelf life before the liquid gels. Adding 5% to 10% tartaric acid
enables the use of lower-fluoride-content glasses, which makes
the restoratives more translucent and esthetic. Fluoride in glass
can cause phase separation within the glass particles, which
creates opacity.
When the GIC powder and liquid are mixed, the acid starts
to dissolve the glass, releasing calcium, aluminum, sodium, and
fluorine ions into the liquid. The high aluminum content is the
key to the glass reactivity with polyacrylic acid. The undissolved
portion of the glass particles is sheathed by a silica-rich gel formed
on the surface of the glass particles when the ions are leached. The
polyacrylic acid chains crosslink with the calcium ions and aluminum ions. Sodium and fluorine ions of the glass do not participate
in the crosslinking of the cement. The set GIC consists of undissolved glass particles with a silica gel coating, embedded in an

Nominal Compositions of Glass-Ionomer
Cement Powders (wt%)

Compound

A

B

C

D

E

F

SiO2

36

20–30

41.9

35.2

34

32

Al2O3

36

10–20

28.6

20.1

45

32

AlF3

1.6

2.4

CaF2

15.7

20.1

NaF

9.3

3.6

AlPO4

3.8

12.0

CRITICAL QUESTION
Identify two critical roles of water in the setting of conventional GIC, and
discuss their influence on the properties of the set GIC.

CH

9

10–15

Na2O

7

1–5

Acrylic acid
unit
CH2
C

CH2 COOH

Itaconic acid
unit

CH2
CH

COOH
Maleic acid
unit

CH2

COOH

CH

COOH
Tricarboxylic
acid unit

COOH
CH2 COOH

• Figure 7-9 Structure of various types of alkanoic acids that make up
polyacids of glass-ionomer cements.

9

8
7

No (+) tartaric acid

3

BaO

10–20
14

10–20

SrO
P2O5

COOH

(+) Tartaric acid

La2O5

CaO

COOH

Viscosity

F

141

amorphous matrix of hydrated calcium and aluminum polysalts
containing fluoride ions. Figure 7-11 shows the stylized structure
of set GIC. Glass ionomers bond to tooth structure by chelation
of the carboxyl groups of the polyacrylic acids with the calcium in
the apatite of the enamel and dentin, like that of polycarboxylate
cement. Figure 7-12 is a micrograph of set GIC.
A specialized GIC known as a water-settable glass ionomer is formulated with freeze-dried polyacrylic acid blended with the glass
powder. The powder is mixed with water or an aqueous solution
containing tartaric acid. This type of GIC has an extended working time because additional time is needed to dissolve the dried
polyacrylic acid in water to initiate the acid–base reaction.

C

TABLE 7-5

Dental Cements

13

Time

11
5

1–5

1

5

• Figure 7-10 Effect of tartaric acid on the viscosity–time relationship for
a glass-ionomer cement during setting.

142

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Ca++
COO-

COO-

Ca++
COOCOO-

COO-

COOCa++
COO-

COO-

COOCa++

A

Al+++
COO- COO-

COOCOOCa++

• Figure 7-11 Diagram depicting the structure of a glass-ionomer cement. The solid blue particles represent unreacted glass particles, surrounded by the gel (light blue shaded structure), that form when Al3+ and
Ca2+ ions are leached from the glass as a result of attack by the polyacrylic
acid. The Ca2+ and Al3+ ions form polysalts with the COO− groups of the
polyacrylic acid to form a crosslinked structure. The carboxyl groups react
with the calcium in enamel and dentin.

• Figure 7-12 Photomicrograph of a set glass-ionomer cement showing
unreacted particles surrounded by the continuous matrix.

Clinical Manipulation
Before using GIC for luting, the surface of the prepared tooth
must be clean, uncontaminated by saliva or blood, and dry but
not desiccated deep into the tubules. A pumice slurry can be
used to remove the smear layer produced by cavity preparation.

B
• Figure 7-13 Prepared dentin surfaces. A, Freshly prepared surface with
smear layer. B, After cleansing with polyacrylic acid, the smear layer is
removed, yet the tubules remain plugged.

Alternatively, the tooth may be etched (conditioned) with phosphoric acid (34% to 37%) or an organic acid–like polyacrylic acid
(10% to 20%) for 10 to 20 seconds, followed by a 20- to 30-second water rinse. Figure 7-13 shows the smear layer and the smear
layer removal after a 10-second swabbing action with a 10% polyacrylic acid solution. For cases where the residual dentin thickness from the pulp is less than 0.5 mm, a calcium hydroxide or
tricalcium silicate liner is needed to ensure the GIC acidity does
not affect the pulp. The need for protection from the acidity of the
water-based cements is seen in Table 7-6. After 24 hours, the pH
values of these cements have risen from 2 to 6.
A nonabsorbent paper pad or a cool, dry glass slab may be
used for mixing GIC. A cool glass slab will retard the reaction,
which extends the working time. Like the zinc oxide cements, the
slab should not be colder than the dew point of the room temperature to avoid water condensation and dilution of the liquid.
The powder and liquid should be dispensed just before mixing is
begun; otherwise, evaporation of water increases the acidity of the
liquid. The powder should be rapidly spatulated into the liquid in
less than 45 seconds, or as prescribed in the instructions for use.
Normally, one-half of the powder is mixed into the liquid for 5
to 15 seconds; then the remaining powder is quickly added and
mixed by folding the cement on itself until a uniform and glossy
appearance is observed. A glossy appearance is critical because
this indicates that unreacted polyacid is present for bonding to
teeth. A dull appearance indicates that the setting reaction has
progressed too far.

CHAPTER 7

The viscosity of the mixed GIC varies widely among manufacturers from low to very high. The variations are achieved by
varying the particle-size distribution and P/L ratio. Coarser particles (about 50 μm average) are used for the viscous, restorative
indications, and fine glass particles (about 15 μm) are used for
cementing.
Some glass ionomers are supplied in capsules containing preproportioned powder and liquid (Figure 7-14). The capsules are
convenient and offer a consistent P/L ratio with less variation than
hand spatulation. The seal of the capsule is broken, and the capsule is placed in a triturator for the time and speed given by the
manufacturer. Some capsules are designed with a nozzle for injection directly into the prepared tooth cavity or fixed prosthesis.
With any glass-ionomer cement, a protective liner (i.e.,
Ca[OH]2) should be used if the preparation is estimated to be
closer than 0.5 mm to the pulp chamber. Glass-ionomer restoratives pose a lesser pulpal hazard than when used as luting cements
because the luting cements are mixed with a low P/L ratio and
remain acidic for a longer time. For luting, GIC is applied with
a plastic instrument to coat the entire intaglio surface of the
prosthesis before seating. Excess cement can be removed immediately after seating or when prescribed in the instructions for
use. No surface protection of the cement is needed during the

TABLE 7-6

pH Powder–Liquid Acid–Base of Cements
GLASS IONOMER

Time

Zinc
Phosphate

Zinc
Polycarboxylate

Polyacid
Liquid

Water
Settable

2 min

2.1

3.4

2.3

1.8

5 min

2.6

4.0

3.3

2.0

10 min

3.1

4.4

3.8

3.4

15 min

3.3

4.8

3.9

3.9

60 min

4.3

5.1

4.6

4.8

24 h

5.5

6.0

5.7

6.0

A

Dental Cements

143

initial setting, but a protective coating should be applied after the
removal of excess cement to avoid excess water sorption. For GIC
restorations, the surface of fresh GIC should be covered with a
plastic matrix for about 5 min to avoid excess water sorption during the initial setting. Otherwise, saliva will dilute the matrixforming cations and anions and destroy the hydrated matrix,
creating a weak restorative. When the plastic matrix is removed,
the surface must be protected with varnish or petrolatum while
the excess GIC is removed from the margins. Surface finishing
of GIC restorations must be carried out after the cement sets
and without excessive drying. Before dismissing the patient, GIC
restorations should again be coated with varnish or petrolatum.
If these recommended procedures are not followed, the surface
inevitably becomes chalky or crazed, such as in the restorative
shown in Figure 7-15.
Glass ionomers have served patients well because of their
dimensional stability and persistent fluoride release (Table 7-7),
lasting for 30 days after setting. Although in vitro studies have
shown the ability of the glass-ionomer restorations to inhibit
enamel and dentin demineralization, not all clinical studies have
confirmed the effectiveness of GIC over nonfluoridated materials. GIC restoratives are more vulnerable to wear and have lower
fracture toughness than composite restorations.

Metal-Reinforced Glass-Ionomer Cement
Metal powders have been incorporated into glass-ionomer
cements with the objective of faster setting and perhaps replacing amalgam. The metallic fillers can be silver alloy powder, such
as the alloys used in amalgams, termed alloy admix, or particles
of silver sintered to glass, known as cermet. Metal fillers make
the GIC grayish but more radiopaque. More fluoride is released
from the admix type because the alloy particles are not bonded
to the glass. Less fluoride is released from GI cermet because a
portion of the glass particle is coated with metal. All the procedures that apply to conventional GIC apply to metal-reinforced
GIC. The faster setting, adhesion, and fluoride release from
metal-reinforced GIC are useful for the following applications:

B

• Figure 7-14 Two powder–liquid type II restorative glass-ionomer ce-

• Figure 7-15 Crazed surface on glass-ionomer restorations that resulted

ments. A, Two-bottle system for hand mixing. B, Capsule for trituration
(GC Fuji Triage capsule).

from inadequate protection of the material during maturation. (Courtesy
Dr. Saulo Geradeli.)

144

PA RT I I

TABLE 7-7

Direct Restorative Materials

Cumulative Fluoride Release From
Various Glass-Ionomer Products

Fracture Toughness of Glass-Ionomer
Materials and Selected Restorative
Materials

TABLE 7-9

FLUORIDE RELEASED (μg)
Cement Type

Fracture Toughness (MPa⋅m1/2)

Type of Material

14 Days

30 Days

Cermet

200

300

Conventional GIC (luting)3

Type II glass
ionomer

440

650

Metal-modified GIC (admixed)5

0.30

Metal-modified GIC (cermet)5

0.51

Type I glass ionomer

470

700

Glass-ionomer liner
(conventional)

1000

1300

0.27–0.37

High-viscosity GIC6

0.45–0.72
4

Conventional GIC (restoration)

0.72

3

Glass-ionomer liner
(light-cured)

1200

1600

2

0.97–1.23

Compomer (restoration)

Alloy admix glass
ionomer (silver alloy
admix)

3350

4040

3

Resin cement

1.30
5

Resin-modified GIC (restoration)
1
2

Properties of Restorative Glass-Ionomer
Cements

1.37
0.97–1.60

Amalgam
TABLE 7-8

0.79–1.08

Resin-modified GIC (luting)

Hybrid composite

1.75–1.92

1

Lloyd CH, Adamson M, The fracture toughness (KIC) of amalgam. J Oral Rehabil 12:59, 1985.

2

Compressive
Strength (MPa)

Diametral Tensile
Strength (MPa)

Hardness
(KHN)

Glass ionomer
(Type II)

196–251

18–26

87–177

Cermet

176–212

19–22

30–45

High-viscosity
glass ionomer

301

24

108

Hybrid ionomer

202–306

20–48

64–85

(1) core buildups of teeth to be restored with cast crowns, (2)
restoratives on occlusal surfaces of primary molars with stainlesssteel crowns, and (3) cementing pins and other retentive forms.
The metal-reinforced GICs have limited use as an alternative to
amalgam or composite for posterior restorations because they
are weaker than resin composite core materials and other GICs
(Tables 7-8 and 7-9).

CRITICAL QUESTION
For the atraumatic restorative treatment technique, why is a high-viscosity
GIC the most appropriate material?

High-Viscosity Glass-Ionomer Cement
Atraumatic restorative treatment (ART) is a preventive and
restorative caries-management concept developed for dentistry in
regions of the world that do not have infrastructure such as electricity or piped water systems. Glass-ionomer cements are a natural choice for ART because of their adhesion and fluoride release.
High-viscosity GICs have been developed for this purpose with
smaller particle sizes and using a higher P/L ratio, which increases
the compressive strength (Table 7-8).
The clinical steps in the ART procedure are as follows: (1)
isolating the tooth with cotton rolls, (2) accessing the carious
lesion with hand instruments, (3) removing the soft tissue with an

Adrian Yap UJ, Chung SM, Chow WS, Tsai KT, Lim CT. Fracture resistance of compomer and
composite restoratives. Oper Dent 29:410, 2004.
3

Mitchell CA, Douglas WH, Cheng YS. Fracture toughness of conventional, resin-modified
glass–ionomer and composite luting cements. Dent Mater 15:7, 1999.
4

Bonilla E, Mardirossian G, Caputo AA. Fracture toughness of various core build-up materials.
J Prosthodon 9:14, 2000.
5
Kovarik RE, Muncy MV. Fracture toughness of resin-modified glass ionomers. Am J Dent
8:145, 1995.
6

Yamazaki T, Schricker SR, Brantley WA, Culbertson BM, Johnston W. Viscoelastic behavior
and fracture toughness of six glass-ionomer cements. J Prosthet Dent 96:266, 2006.
GIC, glass-ionomer cement.

excavator, (4) using a weak acid to condition the tooth (enhance
chemical bonding), and (5) placing a high-viscosity GIC using
finger pressure. The survival rate of partially and fully retained single-surface restorations on permanent teeth was reported as 88%
after 3 years. Another study followed restorations in two groups
of children: (1) high-viscosity GIC placed by the ART procedure
and (2) amalgam restorations. The cumulative survival rates after
6.3 years for ART and amalgam restorations were 66% and 57%,
demonstrating the usefulness of the ART procedure.
In a general practice office, electricity and water are available, but the same ART procedures can be used, augmented by
rotary instruments. One study compared the survival of highviscosity GIC using the ART procedure and conventional cavity
preparation with rotary instruments; no statistical difference was
observed between the two methods for class I preparations after
2 years. High-viscosity GICs have been used for core buildup,
primary tooth filling, non-stress-bearing restorations, and intermediate restorations. Short-term clinical studies confirmed that
high-viscosity GICs are suitable alternatives to amalgam in
class I and class II restorations in primary teeth. The capsulized
packaging of high-viscosity GIC (Figure 7-16) is convenient for
trituration.
Orthodontic bands are commonly cemented with GIC. Band
removal is easier with GICs because the use of a desiccating air
spray will weaken the cement. Glass ionomers have also been used
for pit and fissure sealing.

CHAPTER 7

145

Dental Cements

F
A
B
C
D

RelyX unicem capsule

E

• Figure 7-17 Commercial resin cements. A, A hand-mixing paste–paste
dual-cured system for temporary prostheses. B, A single-component
light-cured system for porcelain veneers. C, A paste–paste dual-cartridge
dispensing system that requires hand mixing. D, A powder–liquid capsule
system that is triturated. E, Two paste–paste dual-cartridge systems that
require static mixing; the top one requires a bonding agent, and the bottom one is self-adhesive. F, A liquid–liquid system.

Ketac Molar
Aplicap

GC Fuji IX
Capsule

• Figure 7-16 Two high-viscosity glass-ionomer cements.

Resin Cements
Resin cements are low-viscosity versions of resin-based composites.
These cements have a matrix of methacrylate monomers with dispersed fillers. Silane coating is required on the filler particle surfaces
to bond them to the monomers during polymerization for a durable, wear-resistant material. Polymerization of the resin cement can
be by self-, light- or dual-cured mechanisms. Most resin cements
for adhering devices are dual-cured materials. Dual- or self-cured
cements are used for prostheses made with medium- or high-opacity materials. For dual-cured cements, blue light initiates the curing
at the margins, and the self-cure progresses over time. The lightcured resin cements are indicated for cementing ceramic veneers
and direct bonding of ceramic or polymeric orthodontic brackets.
Because of light attenuation by the translucent prostheses, longer
light exposure is often required than with direct composites. However, the duration of light exposure should be minimized to avoid
heating the pulp. Many brands are available worldwide, which vary
widely in physical properties (Figure 7-17).

Composition and Setting
Resin cements, like resin-based composite, require the same bonding systems as resin-based composites for adhesion to teeth. Many
bonding systems are available, which vary in the steps needed.
The one-, two-, and three-component systems were discussed in
Chapter 6, Classifications by Clinical Steps. The one-component
system combines etching and priming. Bonding systems, like the
resin cements, may be self-, dual-, or light-cured materials, but all
incorporate at least one hydrophilic monomer. Thirty hydrophilic
monomers have been used, each with a methacrylate functionality,

to infiltrate the dentinal collagen and establish a micromechanical bond. Typically, these monomers are acidic or amide formulas in a water-miscible solution. Examples are HEMA, 4-META,
carboxylic acids, and an organophosphate (e.g., 10-methacryloyloxydecamethylene phosphoric acid [MDP]). For systems that
require a bonding agent, the resin primers partially infiltrate
the collagen fibrils that have been demineralized by acid etching.
The resin tags fill the space to reduce adverse pulpal responses
from the osteoblastic processes in the tubules.
Self-cured and dual-cured resin cements contain two components (base and catalyst) that require mixing. Components are
mixed on a paper pad for 20 to 30 seconds or two pastes can be
mixed when dispensed through a dual-chambered syringe through
a static mixing tip. Chemical activation is slower than with light
curing and provides extended working time. In dual-cured
cements, light-curing becomes dominate setting mechanism when
the cement is exposed to a curing light. The most esthetic resin
cements are light-cured only, and their color stability over time is
better than the dual-cured resins.
Some bonding agents are called “universal” bonding agents by
the manufacturer. Most universal bonding agents can be used with
total, self-, and selective etching before placement of dual- or selfcuring cements. Some universal adhesives release fluoride, and some
are two-part liquids that require mixing. The adhesive agent may
also be used as a primer on metal and ceramic-based restoratives.
Not all resin cement systems require a bonding agent. One
system based on 4-META uses liquid monomers and catalysts
without any traditional inorganic fillers and relies on mixing with
various amounts of polymer beads to adjust the viscosity of the
cement for intended applications. This cement eliminates the steps
of etching, priming, and bonding and allows the clinician to bond
prostheses directly to clean abutments. These cement systems
rely on modified dimethacrylate monomers with acid-containing
side chains, such as phosphoric acid, attached as pendant groups.
Upon contact with the tooth surface, the acidic group binds with
calcium in the hydroxyapatite to bond to the tooth.

146

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

The current self-adhesive resin cements are two-part systems:
liquid–powder and paste–paste. For the paste–paste system, one
component is composed of the conventional monomers used in
resin-based composites and acid-leachable fillers, similar to those
used in GICs. The other component contains acid-functional
monomers (Figure 6-4) to achieve demineralization and bonding
to the tooth surface, with inert fillers. Initiators for polymerization
are distributed between components. Only the acidic monomers
on the surface of the mixture contribute to etching and bonding
of the cement to tooth surface, as in GICs. The remaining acidity
of the mixture is neutralized by the leachable glass. This acid–
base reaction constitutes the recurrent setting reaction and releases
fluoride. The setting mechanisms also qualify them as dual-cured
materials.
The self-adhesive resin cements usually show lower bond
strength values than non-self-adhesive resin cements in microtensile or shear testing. Unlike phosphoric acid, the acidic monomers
that etch and promote bonding of the self-adhesive resin cements
do not etch enamel. Therefore for enamel bonding, phosphoric
acid etching is needed.

silicate-embedded area that can be treated with silane to improve
bonding metals with resin cements. The bond-strength values are
similar for metals prepared by grit blasting and electrochemical
etching. Some bonding systems include a metal primer to promote adhesion. Oxide formation on the surface of base metals
increases the bond strength when a resin cement containing MDP
or 4-META is used. However, high-noble-metal dental alloys lack
stable surface oxides. The bonding of noble-metal prostheses is
enhanced by a thin (about 0.5 μm) layer of tin electroplated on
the prosthesis by a dental laboratory. When heated, a layer of tin
oxide forms, which is more adhesive to the cement.

Clinical Manipulation and Evaluation
Liquid–powder formulations are often packaged in capsule form
and mixed by trituration (Figure 7-17, D). Two-paste resin systems are often sold with a static mixer tube to use on the end of
a two-barrel syringe; the static mixer dispenses a mixed cement
(Figure 7-17, E). Static mixing or trituration of capsules has largely
replaced hand mixing. Static mixing is convenient and does not
mix air into the cement, unlike hand mixing. The mechanism of
static mixing is discussed in Chapter 13, Manipulation of Impression Materials.
For bonding inlays or crowns, a separate phosphoric acid–
etching of the enamel margins improves marginal sealing and
adaptation. However, phosphoric acid decreases bond strength to
dentin because the viscous cements cannot penetrate a demineralized collagenous matrix created by phosphoric acid. However,
the self-adhesive resin cements have fairly strong bonds to dentin,
despite the lack of formation of the classical hybrid layer shown
for enamel bonding.
The chemical and physical properties of self-adhesive resin
cements reported in the literature show that self-adhesive resin
cements may be expected to perform as well as other resin-based
and non-resin-based dental cements; however, few long-term
studies are available. Nonetheless, the handling properties of these
materials appear to be excellent, and their acceptance by the profession is increasing.
The monomers in uncured resin cements are irritating to the
pulp. To prevent the infiltration of irritants, pulp protection with
a liner is important when the thickness of the remaining dentin is
less than 0.5 mm. The procedure for preparing the tooth remains
the same for each resin system, but the treatment of the prosthesis
differs depending on the prosthesis material, as described next.

Ceramic Prostheses
Early ceramic prostheses often fractured when nonadhesively
luted with the traditional zinc oxide–based cements. The bonding agents of resin cement are now used to fill the surface flaws
in the ceramic and have reduced the fracture of ceramic prostheses. Resin cement may be partially seen through a translucent
ceramic prosthesis, such as ceramic veneer, and therefore influence
the esthetics. Usually several shades of light-cured resin cements
are available that enable the clinician to optimize esthetics with
ceramic restorations. Some products include water-soluble tryin gels with the same shades as the cements. The try-in gels are
applied like a cement, and then the prosthesis is provisionally
seated and examined in situ for esthetic appearance. This process
can be repeated with various try-in gel shades until the clinician
and patient are satisfied with the esthetic appearance. After the
cement shade has been selected, the try-in paste must be thoroughly removed from the tooth and the prosthesis. The cementation process is completed using a cement with the same shade as
the selected try-in gel.
A variety of ceramic materials are used for prosthodontics,
and they vary in composition and translucency. The porcelain
and lithia disilicate materials contain glass, so these prostheses are
prepared by etching with hydrofluoric acid (HF), usually by the
dental laboratory. Then the etched ceramic is silanated to enhance
adhesion to the resin cement. Zirconia and alumina restoratives
are silica-free, acid-resistant, polycrystalline ceramics. Without the
silicate glass phase, HF etching and silane application are not useful for bonding. These polycrystalline ceramic restorations must
be air abraded with alumina (not silica), and then coated with a
bonding agent containing MDP. Grit blasting with silicate-coated
alumina particles deposits silica on the zirconia or alumina surface
to help with silanization and bonding.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does the treatment of the surface of the prosthesis differ by the type of
resin cement used?

Metallic Prostheses
When bonding a base metal prosthesis, the intaglio should
be roughened by electrochemical etching or grit blasting. Air
blasting of metal surfaces with silicate-coated particles leaves a

Polymeric Prostheses
Polymer-based prostheses, including polymeric veneers, must be
grit-based on the intaglio to increase the roughness for mechanical
adhesion. Some polymer prostheses systems have a special adhesive to be used for bonding, based on the same monomer that is
used to fabricate the prosthesis. A 30-min surface treatment with
special adhesive must be allowed for adequate penetration of the
adhesive into the polymer prostheses before cementing.

Orthodontic Brackets
Mechanical and chemical adhesion to metal orthodontic devices
and teeth are important for the prevention of premature debonding. Bonding of orthodontic brackets requires proper isolation
and etching of the enamel surface to secure the bond between
the tooth and the bracket. The tooth-facing side of the bracket
requires some means of mechanical retention, such as the metal
mesh of the metal bracket or other retentive dimples or ridges

CHAPTER 7

on ceramic or polymer brackets. Additional surface treatment
depends on the class of materials used in the brackets. Ceramic
bracket bases are commonly precoated with an organosilane, like
those used to bond inorganic fillers within the resin matrix of
resin-based composites. Polycarbonate brackets are primed with
a solvent containing methylmethacrylate monomer. When treatment is completed, removal of the appliances should occur at the
tooth–cement interface or, less preferably, at the cement–bracket
interface, but not within the tooth enamel.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the advantages of incorporating polymerizing resin in the GICs?

Combination Cements
Cements may have unique properties created by substituting or
incorporating ingredients. For instance, fluoride release and curing on command (light curing) are desirable for clinicians. Some
noted developments in combination cements are discussed in this
section.

Resin-Modified Glass-Ionomer Cement
RMGIs are also referred to as hybrid ionomers (Figure 7-18). These
cements contain water-soluble polymerizable monomers in a liquid,
usually a water solution of polyacrylic acid, 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA), and polyacrylic acid–modified methacrylate. Catalysts, such as diphenyliodonium chloride (DPICI), are included.
This type of cement has a longer working time and is less sensitive
to water contamination than conventional glass-ionomer cement.
The monomers in hybrid glass-ionomer cements make the
cements more translucent than glass ionomer and therefore more
suitable for restorative indications. The fluoride release and the
higher diametral tensile strengths over glass-ionomer cements
(Table 7-8) make the hybrid GICs more desirable for restoratives.
The hybrid ionomers have a higher tensile strength that is attributed
to their lower elastic modulus imparted by the resin component.
As a powder–liquid system, the liquid component comprises
lower water and carboxylic acid contents than that of GIC. The
powder contains fluoroaluminosilicate glass particles and initiators
for light curing and/or chemical curing monomers in the liquid.

A

B

Dental Cements

147

The incorporation of polymerization of the methacrylate groups
makes RMGI a dual-cured cement. The acid–base reaction begins
upon mixing but continues after the monomer polymerizes. A
tri-cured cement has both chemical and light activation that are
included with the hybrid cement. The carboxylate groups in hybrid
ionomer cements bond to tooth structure as in other GICs, and
the monomers form an amorphous layer at the cement–dentin
interface, with some resin infiltration into the etched dentin for
added adhesion. Higher bond strengths have been measured for
hybrid ionomer cements than for conventional glass ionomers.
The higher bonding to teeth may occur because of better micromechanical interlocking to a roughened tooth surface. The adhesion
of the GIC component of hybrid ionomers to dentin reduces the
probability of gap formation at gingival margins. This feature helps
compensate for the polymerization shrinkage of an overlying resin
composite restoration placed on a hybrid ionomer cavity base.
Clinical indications for hybrid ionomers include cavity liners/
bases, fissure sealants, core buildups, adhesive for orthodontic
brackets, repair material for damaged amalgam cores or cusps, and
restoratives. Direct pulp capping is contraindicated. For any indication, surface conditioning of the tooth structure with a mild acid
is important for bonding the resin component. Placing a hybrid
ionomer, and then a resin-based composite is the so-called “sandwich technique.” This technique combines the fluoride release of
a glass ionomer and the esthetics of a composite restoration and
is recommended for class II and V composite restorations when
individual patients are at a moderate to high risk for caries.
Low-viscosity hybrid ionomers or conventional GICs have
been used for fissure/sealant indications. The retention rate of
glass-ionomer sealants was poor after 1 year, but patches of glassionomer cement that remained within the fissures were effective
in preventing caries.
Some hybrid ionomer cements are marketed based on the unique
filler properties and their ability to flow or to not flow, the latter allowing “stacking.” Marketing terms such as “S-PRG” and “Giomer” are
unique terms from manufacturers that indicate a glass-ionomer filler.
Some hybrid ionomer cements also contain nonreactive filler particles, which lengthen the working time, improve the early strength,
and reduce sensitivity to moisture during setting. The use of nonreactive filler particles along with less carboxylic acid available for bonding
to tooth structure; therefore a dentin bonding system is needed.

C

D

E

• Figure 7-18 Representative resin-modified glass-ionomer cements. A and B, Two-bottle powder–liquid
system. C, Photac Fil Quick Aplicap. D, GC Fuji Plus Capsule. E, Ketac Nano, a paste–paste system using
static mixing.

148

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

A few reports of adverse effects have been attributed to hybrid
ionomers that include HEMA in the formula. HEMA can cause
pulpal inflammation and allergic contact dermatitis. Therefore
hybrid ionomers are not as biocompatible as conventional glass
ionomers. The HEMA in hybrid ionomers increases water absorption over time, with concurrent expansion of up to 8 vol%. The
expansion has been linked to the fracture of all-ceramic crown restorations when hybrid ionomers were used for core buildup or luting cement. Dental personnel may be at risk from adverse effects
such as contact dermatitis and other immunological responses.

bonding, compomers are also used for treating class I and class II
lesions in the primary dentition because of their fluoride-releasing
potential. Compomers are finished just like resin composites.
In a 24-month clinical study of fissure sealants, compomers
performed as well as composite resin sealants, although their marginal integrity was less. Compomers perform as well as composite
resins for class I and II restorations. However, the color stability
of compomers is a problem, likely caused by water absorption and
staining by food. Compomers have been used for bonding orthodontic bands and brackets because of their adhesion to metal,
fast curing, and fluoride release.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does compomer differ from resin-based composite?

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the setting mechanism of calcium aluminate glass-ionomer cement?

Compomer
Compomer is a light-cured material that integrates the fluoridereleasing capability of glass ionomers with the durability of composite resins in a one-paste restorative resin. As a restoration,
compomer restorations perform better than resin-modified glass
ionomers but are inferior to hybrid composites. They contain
nonreactive inorganic filler particles, reactive silicate glass particles, sodium fluoride, a polyacid-modified monomer (e.g., di-ester
of 2-hydroxyl methacrylate with butane carboxylic acid [TCB]),
and photo activators. Compomers are usually one-paste materials
for restorative applications (Figure 7-19).
Single-component compomer cements are water-free and are
packaged in moisture-resistant blister packs. Compomers set by a
polymerization reaction, and then absorb water from the saliva to
initiate the slow acid–base reaction between the acidic functional
groups and silicate glass particles. The product of the acid–base
reaction becomes the source of fluoride release. However, restorative compomers release less fluoride than GICs and hybrid ionomers. Compomer pastes require a dentin-bonding agent prior
to their placement as a restorative because they do not contain
water to be self-adhesive like GICs or hybrid ionomers. The tooth
structure should be etched and followed by the dentin-bonding
agent before placing the compomer. The bond strength of paste
compomers to tooth structure using a dentin-bonding agent is
like that of hybrid ionomers. The restorative compomer materials are mainly used in low-stress-bearing areas, such as class III
and V cavities, as an alternative to glass-ionomer restoratives or
resin-based composites. Together with one-bottle adhesives for

Calcium Aluminate Glass-Ionomer Cement
An innovative self-adhesive bioactive cement combines GIC with
calcium aluminate cement. The unique cement is indicated for
luting of fixed dental prostheses. The main ingredients in the
powder are monocalcium aluminate, polyacrylic acid, tartaric
acid, strontium-fluoro-alumino-glass, and strontium fluoride.
The liquid component contains 99.6% water and 0.4% additives
for controlling setting. The polyacrylic acid (PAA) functions as
in a conventional GIC, crosslinked by Ca2+ ions from the soluble
glass and the Ca-aluminate. The glass-ionomer reaction is responsible for setting time and strength. The working and setting time
are reported to be 2 and 5 min, and the film thickness is low, 15 ±
4 μm. The resulting hydrated material is a composite of hydrated
calcium aluminate cement and a crosslinked polyacrylate polymer. Setting expansion of 0.4% has been reported, although in
vitro studies where the cement was set inside glass tubes did not
show breakage. This amount of expansion was considered acceptable. The monocalcium aluminate absorbs water, which is reputed
to impart bioactivity, forming hydroxyapatite at the margins of
the cement and in contact with the pulp. A microstructural study
showed the formation of hydroxyapatite over this cement in a
phosphate buffer solution. The cement has long-term stability
and strength for crown cementation. Results of a 3-year clinical
study of 38 crowns and bridges revealed a favorable performance
of this cement. The cement is packaged in powder–liquid systems
for hand mixing or capsules using triturator.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the materials and techniques needed to overcome the root canal
system environment and create a hermetic seal with endodontic obturation
systems?

Endodontic Sealers

• Figure 7-19 Typical compomer materials. A, A powder–liquid system.
B, Two single-paste systems. C, A paste–paste dual cartridge using static
mixing. All systems are light-curable.

Endodontic sealers are specialized versions of dental cement
(Figure 7-20) that are used during obturation with gutta-percha
to fill voids and promote a close seal between the core and the
dentinal walls of the canal, preventing or minimizing leakage,
entombing residual microorganisms, and preferably filling areas
of the root canal system that are inaccessible by instrumentation. The requirements for the ideal root canal sealer are listed in
Box 7-1, and the ISO 6876 requirements are shown in Table 7-2.
Several dental cements have been adapted for this specialized use;
the most popular are ZOE-based sealers. ZOE sealers are inexpensive, are slow setting, and have a long history of acceptable clinical

CHAPTER 7

• BOX 7.1

• Figure 7-20 Root canal sealers. The two materials in the back are
powder–liquid systems. The dual-cartridge syringe in the foreground is a
paste–paste system with static mixing tip.

use. However, the newer epoxy-based sealers are radiopaque and
more biocompatible than ZOE. Polyvinylsiloxane (PVS) sealers
are also available as powder–liquid and two-paste systems. Glassionomer cement and resin-modified GICs have also been used.
A filled biodegradable thermoplastic polymer, Resilon (Resilon
Research LLC, Madison, CT), along with a resin-based sealer,
Epiphany (Pentron Clinical Technologies, Wallingford, CT), was
introduced in the 1990s. This system claimed to have less leakage than the traditional gutta-percha with sealer but performed
poorly over time as a result of degradation of the polymer matrix.
Another system uses gutta-percha cones that are coated with a
proprietary resin coating (EndoREZ, Ultradent, South Jordan,
UT) for use in combination with a methacrylate-based, dualcured resin sealer and no dentin-bonding agent. In this case, the
endodontic seal is dependent on the penetration of the hydrophilic sealer into the dentinal tubules and lateral canals following
removal of the smear layer.
In the long, narrow space of the root canal, the application of
any bonding system to form a uniform interface is challenging.
For example, in bonding systems that contain volatile solvents,
evaporation might be hindered. The canal anatomy is not only
problematic to adhesive root canal obturation but also for the
bonding of prefabricated posts. A further problem is that some
irrigating solutions (e.g., sodium hypochlorite) and intracanal
medicaments have adverse effects on root canal dentin collagen
and the longevity of endodontic bonding. Unlike other cements,
endodontic sealers are not light-cured because of the inability to
complete the curing in the depths of a root canal (~2 cm), the
complex anatomy of intercommunicating canals, and the inaccessible locations often in the posterior.
The configuration of the root canal also presents a high “C-factor”
(Chapter 5, Cure Shrinkage and Managing Shrinkage Stress) because
a nonbonded area of the cement layer exists within the bonded canal.
Thus a resin endodontic sealer is subjected to severe stresses induced
by the sealer’s polymerization shrinkage during setting. Debonding
and gaps may occur between the sealer and dentin wall or in between
the solid core material and the sealer along the periphery of the root
canal obturation.
The newest category of endodontic sealers incorporates bioactive cements, such as Total Fill, Edge Endo, iRoot ES, and
Endosequence BC Sealer. These materials are a single paste of
tri-/dicalcium silicate powders suspended in organic liquids. Such

Dental Cements

149

Endodontic Sealer Criteria

Endodontic sealers should have the following characteristics:
• Make a hermetic seal
• Be tacky when mixed to provide good adhesion with the canal wall
when set
• Contain particles of powder that are very ne so that they can mix easily
with liquid, where appropriate
• Be radiopaque for visualization on a radiograph
• Not shrink upon setting
• Not discolor tooth structure
• Be bacteriostatic or at least not encourage bacterial growth
• Set slowly
• Be insoluble in tissue uids
• Be well tolerated by the periapical tissue (and also not provoke an
immune response, be mutagenic, or carcinogenic)
• Be soluble in common solvents, if necessary, to remove the root canal
filling

sealers have a low setting expansion of 0.2% as a result of hydration-forming hydroxyapatite. Many sealers have shrinkage of 6%
or higher, which leads to interface separation, whereas even a small
expansion promotes hermetic interface sealing.
Resin-based sealers with bioactive fillers dispersed in the resin
may not have the same bioactive effect as the single-paste sealer.
The resins coat the bioactive particles and interfere with the release
of calcium and hydroxide ions.

Tri-/Dicalcium Silicate Cement
Dental cements based on tri- and dicalcium silicates (tricalcium
silicate, for short) are beneficial because of their sealing ability,
biocompatibility, and bioactivity. These cements are less cytotoxic than glass-ionomer cements or polymeric materials. These
hydraulic cements need water to set, which is ever present in the
oral cavity. The first tri-/dicalcium silicate product was called mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) and later, bioceramic. These names
are widely used in dentistry to denote the tri-/dicalcium silicates
products (Figure 7-21).
The essential components of these bioactive cements are tricalcium silicate and dicalcium silicate ceramic powders blended
with inert radiopaque powders, usually bismuth oxide, zirconia,
calcium tungstate, barium zirconate, or tantalum oxide. Minor
phases of tricalcium aluminate, calcium sulfate (Table 7-10), calcium carbonate, and tetracalcium aluminoferrite are sometimes
present, depending on the brand. The ferrite compound makes
the cement gray.
Tricalcium silicate cement sets by reaction with water to form
a rigid matrix of calcium silicate hydrates with embedded calcium
hydroxide. The hydration starts on the surface of the tricalcium
silicate particles and gradually penetrates inward, although never
completely. Setting times for these products vary from a few minutes to 2 hours for the original ProRoot MTA. The long setting
time, washout, and high price were major drawbacks of early
products. Improved products are now available with shorter setting times based on finer particle sizes and modified water-based
liquids containing calcium chloride, polycarboxylate, or various
water-soluble organic materials.
Products are available for a range of indications, from pulpal
to periradicular contact. The primary indications are for pulp and
periradicular tissue contact. The tri-/dicalcium silicate cements

150

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

A

B

D

E

C

F

• Figure 7-21 An assortment of tricalcium silicate products with various packaging for the bioactive powder. A, Sachets. B, Bottles. C, Amalgam-type cartridges. D, Ampoules. E, Vials. F, Paste.

TABLE 7-10

Phases in Tricalcium Silicate Cement
Before Hydration

Ceramic Phases

Wt%

Tricalcium silicate 3(CaO)⋅SiO2

45–75

Dicalcium silicate 2(CaO)⋅SiO2

7–32

Radiopaque filler (Bi2O3, ZrO2, CaWO4,Ta2O5)

20–55

A

Minor phases, optional
Tricalcium aluminate 3(CaO)⋅Al2O3

0–13

Tetracalcium aluminoferrite
4(CaO)⋅Al2O3⋅Fe2O3

0–18

Gypsum CaSO4⋅2H2O

2–10

Calcium carbonate (CaCO3)

<10

B

C

are vulnerable to acid dissolution; therefore periodontal and
coronal usage is only temporary. The cement sets over a wide
range of P/L ratios, roughly between 4:1 and 2:1. The P/L ratio
can be varied to suit the case and the clinician’s preference. The
powder should be dispensed onto a glass slab (Figure 7-22, A),
with a drop of the liquid next to the powder. A medium-stiffness
metal spatula should be used to bring powder to liquid and spatulate until a putty-like consistency is reached (Figure 7-22, B).
The mixture can be formed into a “roll” with gloved fingers
(Figure 7-22, C), and then the spatula can be used to cut off small
sections for insertion into a pulpotomy preparation, a root-end
filling of a perforation site, a cavity preparation, or a pulp exposure, such as a pulpotomy. A plastic filling instrument or a small
amalgam carrier is commonly used to transport the cement into

• Figure 7-22 Mixing of mineral trioxide aggregate. A, Dispense powder
and liquid. B, Bring the powder to liquid and spatulate until a putty-like
consistency. C, Roll to the desire shape for usage.

the surgical location, and the cement is then gently compacted. If
the mixed cement is not used immediately, a moist gauze “tent”
can be placed over the material to prevent dehydration. If the
mixture appears dry, usually more liquid can be added to prolong
the working time.
The pH of MTA rises rapidly after contact with water by
releasing calcium hydroxide as a reaction product. The calcium
hydroxide in the set tricalcium silicate makes this material antibacterial, antifungal, and bioactive. That is, the high pH on the
surface causes the precipitation of hydroxyapatite crystals on the
surface in vitro or in vivo. MTA should not be allowed to stay in
contact with the mucosa because the high pH can cause a superficial lesion. Excess material should be washed out of the oral cavity.
The surficial layer of hydroxyapatite that forms in vivo causes a

CHAPTER 7

chain of healing reactions to the bone-like surface, which does
not appear as a foreign body to the cells. Reparative dentin forms
in apposition to the tri-/dicalcium silicates in pulpal indications.
Cementum-like layers form over the tricalcium silicate used to
fill perforations, resorption defects, or root ends. When the tri-/
dicalcium silicate materials set, the dimensional change is < 0.1%
expansion, which is highly desirable for sealing, unlike polymers
that shrink.
New bioactive, hydraulic paste products have been introduced. For these, the tri-/dicalcium silicate cement and
radiopaque powders are suspended in organic liquids. When
used in vivo, the organic liquid diffuses away from the powder, and water diffuses inward to cause setting. Such onecomponent paste products are being used for pulpal and
periradicular containing cements, including endodontic sealing
with gutta-percha.
Other hydraulic cements are likely to be developed that incorporate calcium monoaluminate to make a more acid-resistant
cement suitable for infected (acidic) sights. Also, the reaction
of silica hydrate (silicic acid) with calcium hydroxide (pozzolan
reaction) will be used for new products to create a hydrated silica
cement.

Calcium Phosphate Cements
Calcium phosphate cements are combinations of dicalcium
phosphate dihydrate, dicalcium phosphate anhydrous, tricalcium phosphate, and tetracalcium phosphate that are mixed
with an aqueous solution saturated with calcium phosphate,
an organic acid, or a solution of polymers. An example is
Sankin Apatite Root Canal Sealer (Dentsply Sankin, Tokyo,
Japan).
The cement pastes gradually set and form hydroxyapatite. The
calcium phosphate phases dissolve in the liquid and precipitate a
less soluble calcium phosphate, which “sets” at 37 °C, with some
poorly crystalline hydroxyapatite being formed. The cements
are suitable bone-substitute materials because they are gradually resorbed. They can sometimes be used in place of granular
hydroxyapatite. However, their washout and low strength are
problematic.
Experimental formulas of calcium phosphate base and liner
products have been made that include polymerizable resins and
additives in the liquid phase. The resins allow water diffusion that
facilitates the conversion of calcium phosphate to hydroxyapatite.
Clinical studies show that the caries-affected dentin underneath
this cement had significantly more calcium and phosphorus content to a depth of 30 μm, and the mineral content was in the range
of healthy dentin after 3 months. Research continues to investigate such biocompatible materials for pulpal protection and endodontic indications.

Summary
No single cement is applicable for all indications in dentistry. Prudent dentists have several types of cements in their armamentarium. Manufacturers’ formulas and processes dictate most cement
characteristics, but the clinician has some control over the handling, setting, and to some degree, the biocompatibility through
the mixing ratios or technique.
The historic zinc phosphate cement has fallen out of use, but
ZOE cements are used for luting, for temporary restorations, and
for retaining fixed prostheses on implant-supported abutments,

Dental Cements

151

which facilitates retrievability of the prostheses. Zinc polycarboxylate cements are noninjurious to the pulp and adhesive to tooth
structure, but they are not commonly used because of their short
working time and viscous nature.
Glass-ionomer cements work well for orthodontic bands and
cementing of metal crowns on primary teeth. The fluoride-releasing capability makes glass-ionomer cement the material of choice
for the replacement of restorations that have failed because of
recurrent caries and for patients living in areas where fluoridated
drinking water is not available. A primary disadvantage of glassionomer cements is the slow maturing process that is required to
develop their highest strength.
Resin cements are insoluble in oral fluids, and their fracture
toughness is higher than that of other cements. Resin cements
can be used for all types of cementation, most notably for prostheses with poor retention, and for all-ceramic prostheses where
the esthetic demand is very high. Resin cements require bonding
agents to be effective. Etching may be required to obtain a strong
attachment to enamel with bonding agents. Self-etching and selfadhesive resin cements are now available.
Hybrid ionomer cements are used as a liner, fissure sealant, and
base material and in core buildups and orthodontic band cementation. Compomers are used for cementing metallic prostheses
and some restorative indications. The durability of compomers is
inferior to that of resin-based composites; thus they should only
be used for low-stress areas.
Glass-ionomer, polycarboxylate, and resin cements adhere
chemically and physically to the surrounding surfaces. Excess
cement should be removed as soon as the seating is completed
to prevent adhesion to the exterior of the prostheses or surrounding teeth. A separating medium, such as petroleum jelly, spread
on external and surrounding surfaces inhibits cement adherence,
making cement removal easier when these cements fully set.
The important properties of cements for adhering devices are
summarized in Table 7-11. A high elastic modulus was important
for gold alloy restorations, and a lower elastic modulus is needed
under ceramic restorations.
Pulp capping and cavity liners/base materials are important for
pulpal health and protection from acidic cements. GICs elicit a
greater pulpal reaction than ZOE cement but less than zinc phosphate cement. Calcium hydroxide and tricalcium silicate products are important for direct or indirect pulpal protection. These
bioactive materials initiate subgingival or pulpal tissue healing,
although the tricalcium silicates are superseding calcium hydroxide products, especially for pulpotomies.
Calcium aluminate–glass-ionomer cement relies on the GIC to
establish the early strength and the hydration of calcium aluminate
for final properties and bioactivity. New formulas of cements are
anticipated, based on calcium aluminates and pozzolanic cements.
The latter cement is based on silicic acid reacting with calcium
hydroxide, often called Roman cement.
Specialty areas of dentistry, such as orthodontics and endodontics, use variations of the cements discussed to achieve the unique
needs for their procedures. Endodontic cement formulas include
ZOE, epoxy, polyvinyl siloxane, and now the tricalcium silicates.
The tricalcium silicates are used surgically and nonsurgically,
depending on the viscosity of the cement used.
Cements for dentistry continue to evolve and improve in
their insolubility, sealing, esthetics, bonding, and durability.
Filler particles, usually glass, continue to move to smaller sizes.
Nanoparticles is now a commonly used term, which usually means
silica particles are included, but the material may include other

152

PA RT I I

TABLE 7-11

Direct Restorative Materials

Properties of Cements for Affixing Devices

Cement Type

Setting Time
(min)

Film Thickness
(μm)

24-h Compressive
Strength (MPa)

24-h Diametral Tensile
Strength (MPa)

Elastic Modulus
(GPa)

Solubility in
Water (wt%)

Zinc phosphate

5.5

20

104

5.5

13.5

0.06

ZOE* (type I)

4.0–10

25

6–28

—

—

0.04

9.5

25

55

4.1

5.0

0.05

ZOE + polymer (type II)

6.0–10

32

48

4.1

2.5

0.08

Zinc polycarboxylate

6.0

21

55

6.2

5.1

0.06

Glass ionomer

7.0

24

86

6.2

7.3

1.25

2.0–4.0

<25

70–172

—

2.1–3.1

0–0.01

ZOE–EBA (type II)

Resin

EBA, ethoxybenzoic acid; ZOE, zinc oxide–eugenol.

fillers that have some portion of particles finer than 0.1 μm (100
nm). New adhesive polymers and refinement of the fillers will
continue to help dentists minimize tissue destruction and maximize preservation.

Acknowledgment

Selected Readings

Primus CM, Tay FR, Niu L-N: Bioactive tri/dicalcium silicate cements
for treatment of pulpal and periapical tissues, Acta Biomater 96:35–
54, 2019.
A thorough review of the tricalcium silicate cements.
ten Cate JW, Featherstone JD: Mechanistic aspect of the interactions between
fluoride and dental enamel, Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 2:283–296, 1991.
This article critically reviews the information about tooth-fluoride
interactions, both from laboratory and clinical studies.
Tyas MJ: Milestones in adhesion: Glass-ionomer cements, J Adhes Dent
5:259–266, 2003.
An excellent review of the conventional and hybrid glass ionomer cements.
Weiner R: Liners and bases in general dentistry, Aust Dent J 56(Suppl 1):11–
22, 2011.
This review article discusses the use of liners and bases and the types of
materials that are available to the restorative dentist.
Wilson AD, McLean JW: Glass Ionomer Cements, Chicago, 1988, Quintessence Publishing Co.
This book provides an in-depth discussion of the evolution and chemistry of various GIC formulations.

Ambard AJ, Mueninghoff L: Calcium phosphate cement: Review of
mechanical and biological properties, J Prosthodont 15:321–328, 2006.
This article reviewed literature regarding the use of calcium phosphate
up to 2003.
Darvell BW: Materials Science for Dentistry, ed 10, Duxford, UK, 2018,
Woodhead Publishing.
An excellent resource on chemistry of dental materials.
Davidson CL, Mjör IA: Advances in Glass Ionomer Cements, Chicago,
1999, Quintessence.
Fourteen chapters covering such topics as chemistry, physical properties, bonding, fluoride release, and clinical applications.
Jefferies SR: Bioactive and biomimetic restorative materials: a comprehensive review, Part I, J Esthet Restor Dent 26:14–26, 2014.
An informative paper on use of calcium aluminate cement for
crowns.
Nicholson JW: Polyacid-modified composite resins (“compomers”) and
their use in clinical dentistry, Dent Mater 23:615–622, 2007.
Chemistry and properties of compomers designed for use in clinical
dentistry and reviews the literature in this area.

Figure 7-2 was generously provided by Dr. Carlos Alberto de
Souza Costa of São Paulo State University, Brazil.

Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Ambard AJ, Mueninghoff L: Calcium phosphate cement: Review of
mechanical and biological properties, J Prosthodont 15:321–328,
2006.
This article reviewed literature regarding the use of calcium phosphate
up to 2003.
Balderamos LP, O’Keefe KL, Powers JM: Color accuracy of resin cements
and try-in paste, Int J Prosthodont 10:111–115, 1997.
Color reading by instrument showed there were significant differences
in color between resin cements and their corresponding try-in pastes
by instrument reading.
Berekally TL, Makinson OF, Pietrobon RA: A microscopic examination
of bond surfaces in failed electrolytically etched cast metal fixed prostheses, Aust Dent J 38:229–237, 1993.
The study showed clinical failure of debonded electrolytically etched
[Maryland] bridge retainers occurred mostly at the of resin failure
within the cement layer close to the enamel-resin interface.
Bonilla ED, Mardirossian G, Caputo AA: Fracture toughness of various
core build-up materials, J Prosthodont 9:14–18, 2000.
Chaar MS, Att W, Strub JR: Prosthetic outcome of cement-retained
implant-supported fixed dental restorations: A systematic review, J
Oral Rehabil 38:697–711, 2011.
Cement-retained implant-supported fixed restorations are a reliable
and effective option for single crowns and short-span FDPs but did
not provide accurate information about the ideal type of cement for
stability and retrievability.
Costa CAS, Mesas AN, Hebling J: Pulp response to direct capping with
an adhesive system, Am J Dent 13:81–87, 2000.
This paper reported the effect of direct pulp capping with an adhesive
system and a zinc-oxide eugenol cement [ZOE] in rat molar teeth.
Both materials allowed pulp repair.
Crisp S, Kent BE, Lewis BG, et al: Glass ionomer cement formulations.
II. The synthesis of novel polycarboxylic acids, J Dent Res 59:1055,
1980.
The synthesis of many polycarboxylic acids is reported. A copolymer
of acrylic and itaconic acids was found to combine several favorable
characteristics.
Darvell BW: Materials Science for Dentistry, ed 10, Duxford UK, 2018,
Woodhead Publishing.
An excellent resource on chemistry of dental materials.
Darvell BW, Wu RC: “MTA”—a hydraulic silicate cement: Review
update and setting reaction, Dent Mater 27:407–422, 2011.
A very good review of tricalcium silicate materials.
Davidson CL, Mjör IA: Advances in Glass Ionomer Cements, Chicago,
1999, Quintessence.
Fourteen chapters covering such topics as chemistry, physical properties, bonding, fluoride release, and clinical applications.
Dickens-Venz SH, Takagi S, Chow LC, et al: Physical and chemical
properties of resin-reinforced calcium phosphate cements, Dent Mater
10:100–106, 1994.
This article described the formulation of a resin modified calcium
phosphate cement and the evaluation of properties.
Forsten L: Fluoride release from a glass ionomer cement, Scand J Dent Res
85:503–504, 1977.
The article measured release of fluoride from a glass ionomer cement
and a silicate cement. The fluoride release during the first 2 weeks
was more than those during the subsequent 5 weeks. Slightly more
fluoride was released from the glass ionomer cement than from the
silicate.
Frencken JE, Taifour D, van’t Hof MA: Survival of ART and amalgam
restorations in permanent teeth of children after 6.3 years, J Dent Res
85:622–626, 2006.
For a total of 1117 single- and multiple-surface restorations made
of amalgam and ART GIC, the restorations produced with the ART
approach survived longer than those produced with amalgam.
Goldman M: Fracture properties of composite and glass ionomer dental
restorative materials, J Biomed Mater Res 19:771–783, 1985.

The investigation found metal-reinforced GIC exhibited a lower fracture toughness than that of composite resins—a reflection of brittle
material.
Jefferies SR: Bioactive and biomimetic restorative materials: a comprehensive review. Part I, J Eesthet Restor Dent 26:14–26, 2014.
An informative paper on use of calcium aluminate cement for crowns.
Knibbs PJ, Walls AWG: A laboratory and clinical evaluation of three dental luting cements, J Oral Rehabil 16:467–473, 1989.
A number of studies such as this one have found poor correlation
between in vitro and in vivo disintegration of different luting agents.
The possible explanations are discussed.
Kovarik RE, Muncy MV: Fracture toughness of resin-modified glass ionomers, Am J Dent 8:145–148, 1995.
Lloyd CH, Adamson M: The fracture toughness (KIC) of amalgam, J Oral
Rehabil 12:59–68, 1985.
McKinney JE, Antonucci JM, Rupp NW: Wear and microhardness of a
silver-sintered glass ionomer cement, J Dent Res 67:831–835, 1988.
The investigation showed reduced wear with a cermet ionomer compared with an unfilled cement by test procedures designed to replicate
masticatory wear patterns. It also suggested that silver might have provided some lubricating effect.
McLean JW: Limitations of posterior composite resins and extending
their use with glass ionomer cements, Quintessence Int 18:517–529,
1987.
The advantages and disadvantages of composite resins versus glass
ionomer cements in posterior situations are reviewed.
Mennemeyer VA, Neuman P, Powers JM: Bonding of hybrid ionomers
and, resin cements to modified orthodontic band materials, Am J
Orthod Dentofac Orthop 115:143–147, 1999.
Air abrasion of band materials provides highly increased bond strength
of hybrid ionomer and resin cements to metal, except for the conventional glass ionomer.
Mitchell CA, Douglas WH, Cheng YS: Fracture toughness of conventional, resin-modified glass-ionomer and composite luting cements,
Dent Mater 15:7–13, 1999.
This study determined differences existed between the fracture toughness of the three types of luting cement, and the effect of mixing
method.
Mount GJ: An Atlas of Glass Ionomer Cements—A Clinician’s Guide, ed 3,
London, 2002, Martin Dunitz.
An excellent book for step-by-step presentation of the clinical usage of
the various GIC formulations.
Nicholson JW: Polyacid-modified composite resins (“compomers”) and
their use in clinical dentistry, Dent Mater 23:615–622, 2007.
Chemistry and properties of compomers designed for use in clinical
dentistry and reviews the literature in this area.
Pameijer CH, Nilner K: Long term clinical evaluation of three luting
materials, Swed Dent J 18:59–67, 1994.
Clinical evaluations up to 4 years show the three luting cements
performed satisfactorily. The choice of a final luting agent should
be based on anticipated postoperative pulpal reactions, rather than
exclusive reliance on physical properties.
Peters MC, Bresciani E, Barata TJ, et al: In vivo dentin remineralization
by calcium-phosphate cement, J Dent Res 89:286–291, 2010.
Clinical study reveals the capacity of a Ca-P base to promote remineralization of caries-affected dentin.
Phillips RW, Crim G, Swartz ML, et al: Resistance of calcium hydroxide
preparations to solubility in phosphoric acid, J Prosthet Dent 52:358–
360, 1984.
Newer “hard-setting” calcium hydroxide base material is less soluble
in acid than earlier versions.
Phillips RW, Swartz ML, Lund MS: In vivo disintegration of luting
agents, J Am Dent Assoc 114:489–492, 1987.
The in vivo solubility of a GIC was superior to either zinc phosphate
or carboxylic cement. Only silicophosphate cement approached the
GIC.
Powis DR, Folleras T, Merson SA, et al: Improved adhesion of a glass ionomer cement to dentin and enamel, J Dent Res 61:1416–1422, 1982.
152.e1

The first of many studies showing improvement in the bond strength
of a glass ionomer cement to tooth structure when the smear layer is
removed with polyacrylic acid.
Primus CM, Tay FR, Niu L-N: Bioactive tri/dicalcium silicate cements
for treatment of pulpal and periapical tissues, Acta Biomater 96:35–
54, 2019. doi:10.1016/j.actbio.2019.05.050.
A thorough review of the tricalcium silicate cements.
Sidhu SK, Watson TF: Resin-modified glass ionomer materials - A status
report for the American Journal of Dentistry, Am J Dent 8:59–67,
1995.
This report described the difference between conventional and early
version of hybrid ionomers.
Smith DC: Development of glass-ionomer cement systems, Biomaterials
19:467–478, 1998.
This article reviewed bonding of polyacrylic acid to backgrounds that
led to the development of glass ionomer cement.
Smith DC, Ruse ND: Acidity of glass ionomer cements during setting
and its relation to pulp sensitivity, J Am Dent Assoc 112:654–657,
1986.
The data showed that the glass ionomer luting cements showed lower
pH values for longer times than zinc phosphate and polycarboxylic
cements.
Swartz ML, Phillips RW, Clark HE: Long-term F release from glass ionomer cements, J Dent Res 63:158–160, 1984.
Fluoride release from luting and filling GIC, and silicate cement is
similar over a 12-month period. The silicophosphate cement released
somewhat lesser fluoride, while the release from a fluoride containing
polycarboxylate was negligible after the first few days.
ten Cate JW, Featherstone JD: Mechanistic aspect of the interactions
between fluoride and dental enamel, Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 2:283–
296, 1991.

152.e2

This article critically reviews the information about tooth-fluoride
interactions, both from laboratory and clinical studies.
Tyas MJ: Milestones in adhesion: Glass-ionomer cements, J Adhes Dent
5:259–266, 2003.
An excellent review of the conventional and hybrid glass ionomer
cements.
Weiner R: Liners and bases in general dentistry, Aust Dent J 56(Suppl
1):11–22, 2011.
This review article discusses the use of liners and bases and the types of
materials that are available to the restorative dentist.
Welbury RR, McCabe JF, Murray JJ, et al: Factors affecting the bond
strength of composite resin to etched glass ionomer cement, J Dent
16:188–193, 1988.
Omission of the etching process did not produce a significantly inferior bond, but the results were less dependable.
Wilson AD, McLean JW: Glass Ionomer Cements, Chicago, 1988, Quintessence Publishing Co.
This book provides an in-depth discussion of the evolution and chemistry of different GIC formulations.
Wolff MS, Barretto MT, Gale EN, et al: The effect of the powder-liquid ratio on in vivo solubility of zinc phosphate and polycarboxylate
cements, J Dent Res 64:316, 1985.
Low powder-liquid ration ratios undergo significantly more rapid disintegration than mixes made with recommended ratio.
Yamazaki T, Schricker SR, Brantley WA, et al: Viscoelastic behavior
and fracture toughness of six glass-ionomer cements, J Prosthet Dent
96:266–272, 2006.
Yap AU, Soh MS, Han TT, et al: Influence of curing lights and modes
on cross-link density of dental composites, Oper Dent 29:410–415,
2004.

