2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of
Material and Principles of Adhesion
OUTLINE
Interaction Between Two Atoms

Polymers

Types of Bonding

Composite Materials

Atomic Arrangement

Adhesion and Bonding

Metals

Bonding to Tooth Structure

Ceramics

KEY TERMS
Adhesion An attraction between two contacting surfaces promoted by the interfacial force of attraction between the molecules or atoms of two different species; adhesion may occur as
chemical adhesion, mechanical adhesion (structural interlocking), or a combination of both.
Adhesive and adherend Substance that promotes adhesion of
one substance or material to another. An adherend is a material
substrate bonded to another material by means of an adhesive.
Alloy and alloy system An alloy is a crystalline solid with metallic
properties that is composed of two or more elements, at least
one of which is a metal, and all of which are mutually soluble in
the molten state. Alloy systems are all possible alloyed combinations of two or more elements, at least one of which is a metal.
For example, the binary gold-silver system includes all possible
alloys of gold and silver, varying from 100% gold and 0% silver
to 100% silver and 0% gold.
Bonding The action of joining objects or particles together by
means of adhesive or force of attraction.
Ceramic Solid-phase compounds of metallic and nonmetallic
elements.
Cohesion Bonding between molecules or atoms of the same species.
Composite A material made of two or more constituent components with significantly different physical or chemical properties
that, when combined, produce a material with characteristics
different from the individual components.
Contact angle Angle of intersection between a liquid and a surface of a solid that is measured from the solid surface through
the liquid to the liquid/vapor tangent line originating at the
terminus of the liquid/solid interface; used as a measure of wettability, whereby no wetting occurs at a contact angle of 180°,
and complete wetting occurs at an angle of 0°.
Copolymer Polymer made of two or more types of monomers.
A random copolymer is when there is no sequential order of
monomer types along the polymer chain. A block copolymer
is when groups of each type of monomer appear in the same

polymer chain. A graft or branched copolymer is when a sequence of one type of mer unit is grafted onto the backbone of
a second type of monomer to form a branched structure.
Crosslink A difunctional or multifunctional monomer that forms
a link between two growing polymer chains during polymerization that results in a three-dimensional interconnected polymer
network.
Curing Chemical reaction in which low-molecular-weight monomers are converted into higher-molecular-weight materials
through polymerization to attain desired properties.
Elastic recovery The shape of objects changes under an applied
force. When the force is removed, the object will recover to its
original shape instantly if it is an elastic solid, or the recovery
process occurs over a period of time if it is a viscoelastic material.
The greater the viscous nature of a material, the less complete
the recovery.
Glass-transition temperature (Tg) (1) The temperature above
which a sharp increase in the thermal expansion coefficient occurs, indicating increased molecular mobility. (2) The temperature at which macromolecule molecular motion begins to force
the polymer chains apart. Thus polymeric materials soften when
heated above this temperature.
Grain and grain boundary A grain is a single crystal in the microstructure of a metal. Metals and alloys are solids consisting
of many individual grains, and the interface between adjacent
grains is the grain boundary.
Metal (1) An element or alloy whose atoms readily lose electrons to
form positively charged ions. (2) A metallic material composed of
one or more elements that is opaque, ductile, relatively malleable,
a good conductor of electricity, a good thermal conductor, and
usually lustrous when light is reflected from its polished surface.
Microstructure Structural features of a surface, including grains,
grain boundaries, phases, and defects, such as porosity, revealed
by microscopic imaging of the chemically or electrolytically
etched surface of a flat, polished specimen.

15

16

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Micromechanical bonding Retention associated with an adhesive
penetrating a roughened adherend surface.
Monomer and mer A monomer is a chemical compound that is
capable of reacting to form a polymer; each monomer becomes
a mer of a polymer.
Phase and phase diagram (constitution diagram) A graph of
equilibrium phases and solubility limits for an alloy system as a
function of composition and temperature.
Polymer Large molecules (a.k.a. macromolecules) formed by the
union of many simple repeating units (mers); the chemical
process is known as polymerization.
Primary bond Bonding between atoms that include ionic, covalent, and metallic bonds.
Resin or synthetic resin Blend of monomers and/or macromolecules with other components, which form a material with a set
of useful properties.
Solid solution (metallic) A solid crystalline phase containing two
or more elements, at least one of which is a metal and whose
atoms share the same crystal lattice.
Strain Magnitude of deformation (stretching, compression, or
shear) occurring in response to an applied force.
Stress The perpendicularly directed force, exerted as pressure or
tension, on a material that causes the object to deform (strain),
measured in units of force per unit area.
Surface energy The excess energy of attraction that the surface
of a material (liquid and solid) has compared with the bulk of
the material because molecules or atoms at the surface are

not surrounded by their fellows as those in the bulk. It can
be treated as the work (energy) required to build an area of a
particular surface and has the unit of mN/m2.
Surface tension The tendency of fluid surfaces to contract to the
smallest surface area by an inward force caused by the imbalance of mutual attraction between molecules on the liquid
surface. The very inward force also keeps the molecules of the
surface constantly under tension. The cohesive force keeping
molecules bonded on the surface is known as the surface tension of the liquid, with the unit of mN/m.
Thermoplastic polymer Macromolecule material made of linear
and/or branched chains that softens when heated above the
glass-transition temperature (Tg); it can then be molded to a new
shape and cooled below the Tg to retain the new configuration.
Thermoset polymer Polymeric material that retains a crosslinked
structure during polymerization; the acquired structure results
in a rigid polymer that, upon heating, does not soften enough
to be molded to a new configuration.
van der Waals forces Short-range force of physical attraction that
promotes adhesion between molecules of liquids or molecular
crystals. Also known as secondary bond.
Wetting and wetting agent Wetting is the ability of a liquid to maintain contact with a solid surface; it reflects the intermolecular interactions when the two are brought in intimate contact. A wetting
agent is a surface-active substance that can be applied to a solid
substrate to reduce the surface tension of the liquid to be placed
on the solid; the purpose is to promote wetting or adhesion.

All matter is composed of indivisible particles called atoms, the
smallest size of particles having properties identical to those of bulk
material. The commonly accepted structure of atoms consists of
three subatomic particles, a negatively charged electron, a positively
charged proton, and an electrically neutral neutron, as depicted
in the electron cloud model of a nitrogen atom (Figure 2-1). The
nucleus contains a mix of protons and neutrons, except for the
hydrogen atoms, where there are no neutrons. Neutrons and protons are held together by nuclear force that is stronger than the
repulsion forces between protons. Nuclear force only acts at an
extremely short distance (≅1 × 10−15 m) and does not affect the
electromagnetic attraction. The electrons of an atom exist in different clouds at the various energy levels (shells). An atom becomes
a negative ion when it gains an electron(s) or a positive ion when

it loses an electron(s). The number of electrons in the shells of the
cloud dictates the property of the matter made of that group of
atoms. These electrons are also called valence electrons.

Proton

Nucleus

Electron

Neutron

• Figure 2-1 Electron-cloud model of a nitrogen atom. The neutrons (blue
spheres) and protons (aqua spheres with “+”) occupy a dense central region called the nucleus. The orange cloud formation illustrates the trace of
electrons (spheres with “–”) as they move around the nucleus.

CRITICAL QUESTION
When the state of material (vapor, liquid, and solid) changes, what happens
between atoms or molecules that make up the material?

Two or more atoms can bond together and form an electrically neutral entity called a molecule. The attraction between atoms
within a molecule is strong, whereas the attractions between molecules are weaker. These attractions result in materials we can see
and touch. Consider water as an example. Chemically, the basic
unit of water is a molecule made of two hydrogen atoms and one
oxygen atom. If each molecule attains a kinetic energy that is higher
than the attraction between these molecules, they appear in vapor
form. Kinetic energy is what allows molecules of known mass to
maintain a constant in motion. As the surrounding temperature
decreases, the level of kinetic energy within individual molecules
decreases, and the attraction between them becomes more prominent so that they condense to liquid form. Further cooling yields
a solid called ice, where the kinetic energy is so low that the molecules are immobilized by attraction forces among them.
The transformation between vapor, liquid, and solid is called
change of state, which is an example of how the attraction between
molecules and the environment affects the behavior of a material as we observe it. The focus of this chapter will be on how the
atomic and molecular attractions shape the four classes of materials used in dentistry, namely, metals, ceramics, polymers, and

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

17

Interatomic force

Resultant force

0
Interatomic
distance

Equilibrium position
(resultant force = 0)

A
Attractive
force

Interatomic potential energy

We can treat each atom as a discrete entity with definite boundaries and volume established by the electromagnetic fields of the
electrons. When two atoms interact with each other in space,
they feel an attraction force from the interaction of the oppositecharged particles of either atom and an expulsion force from
the interaction of the similar-charged particles of either atom.
At a large distance, the interaction between atoms is negligible
(Figure 2-2, A). In Figure 2-2, A, the repulsion and attraction
forces are plotted as a function of the interatomic spacing, which
is the distance between the centers of the cores of the atoms. When
the atoms come close to each other, both forces increase as the distance between the atoms decreases. Initially, the force of attraction
increases faster than the force of repulsion. The repulsion force is a
short-range force compared with the attractive force that becomes
noticed at a closer range. Later, the force of repulsion increases
much more than the force of attraction as the atoms get closer. The
resultant force, which is the sum of attraction and repulsion forces,
increases initially as attraction force when the two atoms get close.
As the repulsion force increases, the resultant attractive force, after
reaching a peak, starts to decline. It then reaches a state of equilibrium when the valence electron shells of the two atoms keep the
atoms from getting closer. At the state of equilibrium, there is no
net resultant force (Figure 2-2, A). In other words, the atoms have
reached a stable state. Before the atoms reach equilibrium, we can
treat the resultant force as the force needed to keep them apart at
that distance. After equilibrium, the negative resultant force means
that external force is needed to push the atoms closer. There is a
great deal of repulsion to overcome. Depending on the number
of valence electrons and species of atoms involved, there are three
types of interaction between atoms when equilibrium is reached.

Repulsion

Interaction Between Two Atoms

Attraction

composites, and affect their behavior in their respective applications. Finally, we will discuss how we can use these bonding
mechanisms to our advantage.

Repulsive
force

Resultant force

Interatomic
distance

Energy at
equilibrium position

Bond Distance

B

Regardless of the type of structure in the solid state, there is a limiting factor that prevents the atoms or molecules from approaching each other too closely. The position at which both attraction
and repulsion forces are equal in magnitude (but opposite in
direction) is considered the equilibrium position of the atoms
(Figure 2-2, A). The interatomic distance at equilibrium represents the sum of the radii of the two adjacent atoms.

• Figure 2-2 Interaction between two atoms. The blue atom is stationary,

Bond Energy
Because the conditions of equilibrium are usually described in
terms of energy rather than interatomic forces, the relationships in Figure 2-2, A can be logically explained in terms of
interatomic energy, which is also known as bond energy or
potential energy. Energy is defined as the product of force and
distance. Integration of the interatomic force (dashed line in
Figure 2-2, A) over the interatomic distance yields the interatomic energy (solid line in Figure 2-2, B). In contrast with the
resultant force, the bond energy can be treated as the energy
needed to keep two atoms apart. Initially, the bond energy
decreases gradually as two atoms come closer together. As the
resultant attractive force passes the peak and begins to decline
rapidly, the bond energy also decreases steeply (Figure 2-2, B).

and the orange atom is moving toward or away from the blue atom. The
bond distance is the distance between the core center of the two atoms.
A, Relation of interatomic forces to interatomic distance. The resultant
force (– –) is the sum of attraction (——) and repulsion (——) forces. At the
equilibrium position (——), either a negative (repulsive) or a positive (attractive) force is required to move the atom out of its equilibrium position.
B, Integration of the resultant force (– –) shown in A over the interatomic
distance yields the interatomic energy (——). Note that the potential energy
is at minimum when equilibrium (——) is reached. The tangent of the resultant force at equilibrium (——) is the slope of the curve.

The bond energy reaches a minimum when the resultant force
becomes zero. Thereafter, the energy increases rapidly because
the resultant force becomes repulsive and increases rapidly with
little change in interatomic distance. The minimum energy
corresponds to the condition of equilibrium and defines the
equilibrium interatomic distance.

Influence of Interatomic Bond
The atoms are in a constant state of vibration, and the average amplitude is dependent on the temperature; the higher the

18

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

temperature, the greater is the amplitude and, consequently, the
greater is the kinetic energy. At a certain temperature, the minimal
energy required to maintain equilibrium is denoted by the bottom
of the trough in Figure 2-2, B. As the temperature increases, the
amplitude of the atomic (or molecular) vibration increases. It follows also that the mean interatomic distance increases (Figure 2-3),
as does the internal energy. The overall effect is the phenomenon
known as thermal expansion.
As the temperature increases from T0 to T5 in Figure 2-3, A,
the mean increase in interatomic distance is less with the deeper
energy trough (Figure 2-3, A) than that in the shallower energy
trough (Figure 2-3, B). This means that the linear coefficient of
thermal expansion (α) of materials with similar atomic or molecular structures tends to be inversely proportional to the melting
temperature. If the temperature continues to increase, the increase
in interatomic distance will result in a change of state, where solid
melts to a liquid, and liquid subsequently vaporizes to gas. For
a solid with lower potential energy (i.e., a deeper trough depth)
(Figure 2-3, A), greater amounts of kinetic energy are required to
achieve melting and boiling, which corresponds to higher melting
and boiling temperatures.
As shown in Figure 2-2, A, the net force on the atoms at the
equilibrium distance is zero, but small displacements, as in an

Interatomic potential energy

Center of vibration
with increased energy
Interatomic
distance

Types of Bonding
The preceding discussion establishes the role of bonding in the
change of state and interatomic bond energy of the thermal and
mechanical properties. When the atoms are in the equilibrium
state with the neighboring atoms, they establish different types
of bonds according to the valence of their electrons. The electron
structure of an atom is relatively stable if it has eight electrons in
its outer valence shell, as noble gases do, except for helium, which
has only two electrons. Other atoms must lose, acquire, or share
electrons with yet other atoms to achieve a stable configuration—
that is, eight electrons in the outer shell. These processes produce
strong primary bonds between atoms. Intermolecular bonds, on
the other hand, rely on dipole forces induced by nonuniform distribution of electrons within the molecule. These are often weaker
and are called secondary bonds.

Primary Bonds
The formation of primary bonds depends on the atomic structures
and their tendency to assume a stable configuration. The strength
of these bonds and their ability to re-form after breakage determine the physical properties of a material. Primary atomic bonds
(Figure 2-4), also called chemical bonds, may be of three different
types: (1) ionic, (2) covalent, and (3) metallic.

T5
T4
T3
T2
T1
T0

A
Interatomic potential energy

increased bond distance, result in rapidly increasing forces to
maintain the equilibrium distance. The magnitude of this force
needed to maintain the displacement is commonly referred
to as the elastic modulus or stiffness of the material, and this
property will be discussed in detail in Chapter 4, Stress-Strain
Properties. The stiffness or elastic modulus of the material is
proportional to the rate of change of the force with a change
in displacement that is measured by the slope of the net-force
curve drawn from the equilibrium (Figure 2-2, B). A greater
slope of the force curve implies a narrower, deeper trough in
the energy curve (Figure 2-3, A). Hence, a high melting point
is usually accompanied by a greater stiffness.
The preceding principles represent generalities, and exceptions
do occur. Nevertheless, they allow one to estimate the influence
of temperature on the properties of most of the dental materials
discussed in subsequent chapters.

Center of vibration
with increased energy
Interatomic
distance
T5
T4
T3
T2
T1
T0

B
• Figure 2-3 Thermal energy and bond energy. As the temperature rises
from T0 to T5, the interatomic distance increases. For the solid with a deeper potential energy trough (A), the actual increase in distance is less than
that of the solid with a shallower potential energy trough (B). Therefore
less thermal expansion and a higher melting temperature are expected for
(A). In addition, a high melting temperature usually is accompanied by a
greater stiffness.

Ionic Bonds
The classic example of ionic bonding is the bond between the Na+
and Cl– of sodium chloride (Figure 2-4, A). Because the sodium
atom contains one valence electron in its outer shell and the chlorine atom has seven electrons in its outer shell, the transfer of the
sodium valence electron to the chlorine atom results in the stable
compound Na+Cl–. In dentistry, ionic bonding exists in some dental materials, such as in gypsum and phosphate-based cements.
Covalent Bonds
A covalent bond is a chemical bond that involves the sharing of
electron pairs between atoms. Figure 2-4, B shows that the fluorine
molecule shares a pair of electrons. By virtue of sharing electrons,
the two atoms are held together by covalent bonds to form a molecule that is sufficiently stable and electrically neutral in a definite
arrangement. The hydrogen molecule, H2, exemplifies covalent
bonding. The single valence electron in each hydrogen atom is
shared with that of the other combining atom, and the valence
shells become stable. Covalent bonding occurs in many organic

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

compounds, such as dental resins, where they link to form the
backbone structure of hydrocarbon chains.

Metallic Bonds
The third type of primary atomic interaction is the metallic
bond (Figure 2-4, C). It is found in elements with one, two, or
three valence electrons. The outer-shell valence electrons can be
removed easily from metallic atoms and form positive ions. The
free valence electrons can move about in the metal space lattice to
form what is sometimes described as an electron “cloud” or “gas.”
The electromagnetic attraction between the electron cloud and the
positive ions in the lattice provides the force that bonds the metal
atoms together as a solid. The free electrons give the metal its
characteristically high thermal and electrical conductivity. These
electrons absorb light energy, so all metals are opaque to transmitted light. The metallic bonds are also responsible for the ability of
plastic deformation of metals. Plastic deformation means a material
can be reshaped by force without fracture. The free electrons can
move through the lattice, whereas their plastic deformability is
associated with slip along crystal planes. During slip deformation,
electrons easily regroup to retain the cohesive nature of the metal.

Na

A

Combination of Primary Bonds
Although we can describe the three primary bonds separately, it is
also possible to find more than one type of primary bond existing in
one material. Consider calcium sulfate (CaSO4), the main ingredient
of gypsum products (Chapter 13, Gypsum Products), as an example. In the sulfate ion (SO42–), the sulfur and oxygen atoms are held
together covalently but are short two electrons. Calcium has two
electrons in the outer orbit, which are easily removed and transferred
to the SO4. The result is a Ca2+ ion with attraction for an SO42– ion.

Secondary Bonds
In contrast with primary bonds, secondary bonds do not share
electrons between molecules. Instead, the asymmetrical distribution of electrons within each molecule induces dipole forces that
attract molecules together.

Van der Waals Forces
Van der Waals forces of attraction arise from dipole attractions
(Figure 2-5). In the case of polar molecules, dipoles are induced
by an unequal sharing of electrons (Figure 2-5, A). In the case of

Cl

Na+

Cl

Ionic bond

-

B

19

Shared electrons

C

• Figure 2-4 Primary bonds. A, Ionic bond, characterized by electron transfer from one element (Na)
to another (Cl). B, Covalent bond, characterized by electron sharing and very precise bond orientations.
Fluorine molecules (F2) share one pair of electrons. C, Metallic bond, characterized by electron sharing and
the formation of a “cloud” of electrons that bonds to the positively charged nucleus in a lattice.

Chance charge
separation
Fluctuating
dipole

A second
molecule
Charged separation
induced by the first
molecule

Attraction
Repulsion
Van der Waals

A
B
interaction
• Figure 2-5 Van der Waals forces by dipole attraction. A, Polar compound; the attraction and repulsion
between molecules are induced by a permanent dipole moment resulting from asymmetrical electron distribution within the molecule. B, Nonpolar compound; a temporary dipole (fluctuating dipole) occurs when
the symmetrical distribution of electrons in a molecule becomes asymmetrical temporarily; it then attracts
the dipole to adjacent molecules, resulting in the eventual interaction.

20

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

nonpolar molecules, the random movement of electrons within
the molecule creates fluctuating dipoles (Figure 2-5, B). Dipoles
generated within these molecules will attract other similar dipoles.
Such interatomic forces are quite weak compared with the primary bonds.

Hydrogen Bond
The hydrogen bond is a special case of dipole attraction of polar
compounds. It can be understood by studying a water molecule (Figure 2-6). Attached to the oxygen atom are two hydrogen atoms. These bonds are covalent. Therefore the protons of
the hydrogen atoms pointing away from the oxygen atom are
not shielded efficiently by the electrons. They become positively
charged. On the opposite side of the water molecule, the electrons
that fill the outer shell of the oxygen provide a negative charge. The
positive hydrogen nucleus is attracted to the unshared electrons of

neighboring water molecules. This type of bond is called a hydrogen bridge. Polarity of this nature is important in accounting for
the intermolecular reactions in many organic compounds—for
example, the sorption of water by synthetic dental resins.

Atomic Arrangement
All materials we use consist of trillions of atoms. As described
earlier, they are attracted to each other and retain a physical
appearance. The question is in which configuration they are held
together. In 1665, Robert Hooke explained crystal shapes in terms
of the packing of their component parts, like stacking musket balls
in piles. This is an exact model of the atomic structure of many
familiar metals, with each ball representing an atom.
In the solid state, atoms combine in a manner that ensures
minimal internal energy and the most efficient packing of atoms.
For example, sodium and chlorine share one electron at the atomic
scale. In the solid state, like grains of salt, they do not exist in individual pairs; in fact, each sodium ion is attracted to six chlorine
ions, and vice versa (Figure 2-7). They form a regularly spaced
configuration (long-range repetitive space lattice) known as a crystal. A space lattice can be defined as any arrangement of atoms in
space in which every atom is situated similarly to every other atom.
There are structures where regularly spaced configurations do
not occur in the solid state. For example, the molecules of some
of the waxes used by a dentist or laboratory technician are distributed at random when solidified. This noncrystalline formation is
also known as an amorphous structure.

Crystalline Structure

• Figure 2-6 Hydrogen-bond formation between water molecules. The
polar water molecule bonds to adjacent water molecules via an H (orange)
O (blue) interaction between molecules.

A

There are 14 possible lattice types. The type of space lattice is defined
by the length of the three unit cell edges (a-, b-, and c-axes) and the
angles (α, β, and γ) between the edges. The simplest and most regular lattice is a cubic, as shown in Figure 2-8, A; it is characterized by
axes that are all equal length and meet at 90° angles, representing
the smallest repetitive volume of a crystal, which is called a unit cell.
Each sphere represents the positions of the atoms. Their positions
are located at the points of intersection of three planes, each plane
(surface of the cube) being perpendicular to the other two planes.
These planes are often referred to as crystal planes. However, the
simple cubic arrangements shown in Figure 2-8, A, is hypothetical
because it leaves enough space to fit additional atoms per unit cell.

B

• Figure 2-7 The atomic arrangement of table salt. A, Sphere model showing that atoms are actually
closely packed together. B, Ball-and-stick model displaying the three-dimensional position of the atoms
and bonds between them. The orange spheres are chlorine ions, and the blue spheres are sodium ions.

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

21

α

β
γ

A

B

C

• Figure 2-8 Unit cells of the cubic space lattices. A, Simple cubic. B, Body-centered cubic. C, Facecentered cubic.
Most metals used in dentistry belong to the cubic system. For
example, iron at room temperature has an atom at each corner
of the cube and another atom at the body center of the cube
(Figure 2-7, B). This crystal form is called a body-centered cubic
(BCC) cell. Copper, on the other hand, has additional atoms at
the center of each face of the unit cell but none at the center
of the cube. This form is called a face-centered cubic (FCC) cell
(Figure 2-7, C). At first glance of Figure 2-7, B, one may think
NaCl retains a simple cubic crystal if we consider that sodium
and chlorine occupy the same lattice. That is incorrect. Sodium
atoms occupy an FCC lattice, and chlorine atoms occupy their
own FCC lattice. The two FCC lattices interpenetrate to form
the final lattice. Other types of space lattices of dental interest
are shown in Figure 2-9. The hexagonal close-packed arrangement
(Figure 2-9, G) observed in titanium, zinc, and zirconium has
become an important crystalline structure in dentistry. Note that
each unit cell consists of three layers of atoms, and the base, being
hexagonal, has a 120° edge.
All metallic-based dental materials are crystalline. Some pure
ceramics, such as alumina and zirconia core materials, are entirely
crystalline.

Noncrystalline Structure
Glass is a typical noncrystalline solid of SiO2 because its atoms
tend to be arranged in nonrepeating units (Figure 2-10). The
ordered arrangement of the glass is locally interspersed with a considerable number of disordered units. Because this arrangement is
also typical of liquids, such solids are sometimes called supercooled
liquids. Because of the complexity of the physical configuration of
polymer chains, the molecules of resins are not favored to arrange
in orderly, repeating patterns. Therefore polymer-based materials
used in dentistry are usually noncrystalline.
The structural arrangements of the noncrystalline solids do not
represent such low internal energies as do crystalline arrangements
of the same atoms and molecules. Noncrystalline solids do not
have a definite melting temperature but, rather, gradually soften
as the temperature is raised. The temperature at which there is
an abrupt increase in the thermal expansion coefficient, indicating increased molecular mobility, is called the glass-transition
temperature (Tg) (Figure 2-11); it is characteristic of the glassy
structure. Below Tg, the material loses its fluid characteristics and
gains significant resistance to shear deformation. When set, synthetic dental resins are examples of materials that often have glassy
structures, with Tg greater than body temperature.
Many dental materials often consist of a noncrystalline glassy
matrix and crystalline inclusions (filler phase). Crystalline inclusions provide desired properties, including color, opacity, increased
thermal expansion coefficients, and in some dental ceramics,

increased radiopacity. The filler phase of resin-based composites
(Chapter 5, Fillers), on the other hand, can be crystalline, such as
quartz particles or noncrystalline glass spheres.

Diffusion
When we place a drop of ink in a bowl of water, we observe the
spread of the ink in the water. It will eventually disperse throughout the entire body of the water. This process is called diffusion.
The same process also occurs within solid materials but at a substantially slower rate. An understanding of diffusion in a solid
requires two new concepts.
First, the atoms in a space lattice, as previously described, are
constantly in vibration about their centers. However, the atoms
in the material do not all possess the same level of energy. Rather,
there is a distribution of atoms with energy that varies from very
low to high, with the average energy at equilibrium. If the energy
possessed by an atom exceeds the bond energy, it can move to
another position in the lattice.
Second, there are a finite number of missing atoms (called
vacancies) within a solid formed during solidification. A noncrystalline structure, because of short-range order, also contributes
some space. Both conditions represent pathways through which
diffusion can occur. Atoms change position in pure, single-element solids even under equilibrium conditions; this process is
known as self-diffusion. As with any diffusion process, the atoms
or molecules diffuse in the solid state to reach an equilibrium
state. Just as ink disperses uniformly in water, a concentration
of atoms in a solid metal can also be redistributed through the
diffusion process.
Diffusion may also occur in the other direction to produce a
concentration of atoms in a solid. For example, if the sugar in
water becomes supersaturated, the molecules of sugar diffuse
toward each other, and the sugar crystallizes out of solution. In
the same manner, a solid copper-silver alloy, to be discussed in
Phase Diagram, with a higher copper concentration may cause
supersaturation of copper in silver, which forces the diffusion of
copper atoms to increase the concentration of copper locally,
causing them to precipitate.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are mercury and gallium of interest as components of direct restorative
materials?

The diffusion of elements in most crystalline solids at room
temperature is very low. Yet at temperatures that are a few hundred degrees higher, the bond energy between atoms decreases,
thus allowing rapid atomic diffusion. For the same reason, the

22

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

α

A

γ

B

C

D

γ

E

F

γ

H

G

• Figure 2-9 Other lattice types of dental interest. A, Rhombohedral. B, Orthorhombic. C, Monoclinic.
D, Triclinic. E, Tetragonal. F, Simple hexagonal. G, Close-packed hexagonal. H, Rhombic.

Si

A

O

B

• Figure 2-10 Two-dimensional illustration of crystalline (left) and noncrystalline (right) forms of SiO2.

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

Volume

Liquid

Melting
s
Glas

ine

tall

s
Cry

Tg

Tm

Temperature

• Figure 2-11 Plot of glass-transition temperature. The glass-transition temperature (Tg) differs from the melting temperature (Tm), where a
crystalline solid changes to a liquid state with an increase of volume. Tg
marks the temperature at which major segments of polymer chains begin
to gain some translational freedom, as observed by a gradual increase
of volume.

diffusion in a crystalline solid of a lower melting point, the rate
of diffusion is greater. Diffusion in a noncrystalline material
may occur at a more rapid rate and often may be evident at
room or body temperature. The disordered structure enables the
molecules or atoms to diffuse more rapidly with less activation
energy. Both mercury and gallium are liquid at room temperature because of their melting points at –38.36 °C (–7.05 °F)
and 29.78 °C (85.60 °F), respectively. When either liquid metal
is mixed with a suitable metal alloy, atoms in the alloy dissolve
and diffuse rapidly within the liquid metal at intraoral temperature. The result is a new solid metal compound. This process
has been used in dentistry for making metallic direct restorative
materials (Chapter 8, Amalgam Alloy).

CRITICAL QUESTION
Can you describe metals by their appearance and usage?

Metals
Metals, by their appearance and usage, have several characteristics.
A clean, polished metallic surface exhibits a luster that cannot be
duplicated by other classes of solids. Most metals emit a metallic
sound (“ring”) when they are struck by another metal. They are generally excellent thermal and electrical conductors. Metals are more
resistant to deformation or rupture from external forces and denser
than nonmetallic structures. Most metals are also far more ductile
and malleable than nonmetals, which are generally brittle. The significance of strength, ductility, malleability, and brittleness will be
discussed in the chapter on mechanical properties (Chapter 4). Only

23

a few metals are resistant to tarnish and corrosion in the air at room
temperature.
Pure metals, in common with other elements, can be identified by their specific melting and boiling points and by their basic
physical and chemical properties. Some relevant properties for
metals of dental interest are listed in Table 2-1. Information about
the atom size, crystal structure, and chemical properties of these
elements is provided in Table 2-2. Note that several important elements have more than one crystal structure (polymorphic forms),
depending on the temperature, and have multiple valences.
Of the 118 elements currently listed in the periodic table
(Figure 2-12), about 88 can be classified as metals. One common
feature in the atomic structure of metal elements is that the outermost electrons (valence electrons) around the neutral metallic
atoms are easily given up. This property constitutes the basis of the
metallic bond, where a “cloud” of valence electrons becomes the
“glue” for the positively charged ionic cores made of the nuclei
and the balance of the bound electrons. The bond is nondirectional, allowing the ionic cores to break interatomic bonds with
facility and establish new bonds with other ionic cores at different
positions. This property enables metals to undergo distortion
before fracturing (properties of ductility and malleability) under
mechanical stresses. It should be noted that many metals of
importance for dental alloys are transition elements that have
incomplete inner electron shells.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are pure metals not often used for dental applications?

Pure metals have limited uses in dental and engineering applications because they are too soft to resist deformation from external forces. It has been found that mixtures of two or more metallic
elements or mixtures of one or more metals and nonmetallic elements often result in improved properties beyond what the individual elements can provide. This combination of elements is
called an alloy. An alloy system refers to all possible combinations
(weight percentage or atomic percentage) of elements in the system. Alloys are generally prepared by fusion of the elements above
their melting points. In this book, the term “metal” is used allinclusively to include alloys and pure metals. If the phenomenon
discussed does not apply to both alloys and pure metals, a distinction will be made. The mechanisms for property improvement,
and the effects on physical and chemical properties of alloys, will
be discussed in some detail in Chapter 9.
To make a metal prosthesis, an exact wax or plastic pattern of
the prosthesis is prepared initially. Using a dental investment, an
expanded mold is prepared from the pattern, into which the molten alloy is filled under pressure (Chapter 14, Investing Procedure). When the alloy solidifies, it shrinks to the intended
dimensions. The mechanical properties of the final cast prosthesis
can often be manipulated by regulating the cooling procedure. In
this chapter segment, we will first discuss how a solid emerges
from the molten (liquid) state and the resultant microstructure of
pure metals. We then will discuss the criteria for forming different
types of alloys, the interpretation of phase diagrams, and refinement of the properties of alloys by controlled heating and cooling.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why do dental alloys begin freezing by heterogeneous nucleation rather than
by homogeneous nucleation?

24

PA RT I

TABLE 2-1

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Physical Properties of Elements in Dental Alloys

Element

Symbol

Atomic Weight

Melting Point (°C)

Density (g/cm3)

Thermal Expansion
Coefficient (10−6/K)

Aluminum

Al

26.98

660

2.70

23.6

Carbon

C

12.01

630

2.22

6.0

Chromium

Cr

52.00

271

7.19

6.2

Cobalt

Co

58.93

1495

8.85

13.8

Copper

Cu

63.54

1083

8.96

16.5

Gold

Au

196.97

1063

19.32

14.2

Indium

In

114.82

156

7.31

33.0

Iridium

Ir

192.20

2454

22.50

6.8

Iron

Fe

55.85

1527

7.87

12.3

Magnesium

Mg

24.31

650

1.74

25.2

Mercury

Hg

200.59

−39

13.55

40.0

Molybdenum

Mo

95.94

2619

10.22

4.9

Nickel

Ni

58.71

1453

8.90

13.3

Palladium

Pd

106.40

1552

12.02

11.8

Platinum

Pt

195.09

1769

21.45

8.9

Rhodium

Rh

102.91

1966

12.44

8.3

Silicon

Si

28.09

1410

2.33

7.3

Silver

Ag

107.87

961

10.49

19.7

Tin

Sn

118.69

232

7.30

23.0

Titanium

Ti

47.90

1668

4.51

8.5

Tungsten

W

183.85

3410

19.30

4.6

Zinc

Zn

65.37

420

7.133

0.4

Data from Lyman T, editor: Metals Handbook, vol 1, ed 8, Cleveland, OH, 1964, American Society for Metals.

Solidification and Microstructure of Metals
If a pure metal is melted and cooled to room temperature under
very clean laboratory conditions, a graph of its temperatureversus-time behavior would look similar to that in Figure 2-13.
The temperature decreases steadily from point A to point B′. An
increase in temperature then occurs from point B′ to point B,
at which time the temperature remains constant until the time
indicated at point C is reached. Subsequently, the temperature of
the metal decreases steadily to room temperature (point D). The
temperature, Tf, indicated by the “plateau” portion of the curve at
point BC, is the solidification temperature of the pure metal. This
is also the melting point or fusion temperature.
During the initial cooling, the molten metal remains in the
liquid state to point B′, which is below the solidification temperature; this process is termed supercooling or undercooling. During
the supercooling stage, crystallization of the pure metal begins.
Once the crystals begin to form, the release of latent heat from
liquid changing to solid causes the temperature to rise to Tf, where
it remains until crystallization is completed at point C. Supercooling of pure metals occurs only in clean, inert containers under

circumstances in which heterogeneous nucleation of metal crystals
is not possible.

Nucleus Formation
Solidification of a metal requires nuclei of crystallization. The
liquid state can be imagined as one of a multitude of random
atoms surrounding numerous unstable atomic aggregates or
clusters that are attempting to form crystal nuclei. These temporary nuclei are called embryos. On approaching the solidification temperature, these embryos increase in number and size, but
they are still unstable and tend to dissolve into the liquid matrix.
However, once the supercooled process is completed, there is a
tendency for some of these embryos to survive and thus become
solidification nuclei. This method of nucleus formation is called
homogeneous nucleation, and the formation of nuclei in the molten metal is a random process with equal probability of occurring
at any point in the melt.
Another method of forming stable embryos is for the atoms in
the molten metal to contact some surface, particles in the melt, or
particles in the container. Such a process is known as heterogeneous

CHAPTER 2

TABLE 2-2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

25

Atom Size, Crystal Structure, and Chemical Properties of Elements in Dental Alloys

Element

Symbol

Atom Radius (nm)

Crystal Structure

Oxidation States

Electronegativity

Aluminum

Al

0.118

Face-centered cubic

+3

1.61

Carbon

C

0.067

Hexagonal (graphite)
Diamond cubic (diamond)

+4

2.55

Chromium

Cr

0.166

Body-centered cubic

+2, +3

1.66

Cobalt

Co

0.152

Hexagonal close-packed (≤450 °C)
Face-centered cubic (>450 °C)

+2

1.88

Copper

Cu

0.145

Face-centered cubic

+1, +2

1.9

Gallium

Ga

0.136

Orthorhombic

+3

1.81

Gold

Au

0.174

Face-centered cubic

+1, +3

2.54

Iron

Fe

0.156

Body-centered cubic (≤911 °C)
Face-centered cubic (>911 °C)

+2, +3

1.83

Mercury

Hg

0.171

(Liquid above –39 °C)

+2

2

Molybdenum

Mo

0.190

Body-centered cubic

+6

2.16

Nickel

Ni

0.149

Face-centered cubic

+2, +3

1.91

Platinum

Pt

0.177

Face-centered cubic

+2, +4

2.28

Palladium

Pd

0.169

Face-centered cubic

+2, +4

2.2

Silver

Ag

0.165

Face-centered cubic

+1

1.93

Tin

Sn

0.145

Body-centered tetragonal

+4

1.96

Titanium

Ti

0.176

Hexagonal close-packed (≤880 °C)
Body-centered cubic (>880 °C)

+2, +3, +4

1.54

Zinc

Zn

0.142

Hexagonal close-packed

+2

1.65

Values for atom radius and electronegativity were obtained from http://periodictable.com/.

nucleation because a foreign body “seeded” the nucleus. The distribution of these foreign bodies is not necessarily random. Under
dental casting conditions, heterogeneous nucleation occurs at the
mold wall (investment) or in the molten alloy at impurity particles
or particles of special grain-refining elements.
It should be noted that supercooling is not necessary for heterogeneous nucleation. In fact, heterogeneous nucleation should
account for most of the nucleation that occurs during dental casting. The uniformity of distribution of heterogeneously formed
nuclei is difficult, in principle, to control because the distribution
of the different types of “seeds” is not likely to be uniform.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why might the rates of cooling and solidification affect the grain size of a
dental casting?

Liquid-to-Solid Transformation of Cast Metals
As a liquid metal cools and solidifies, crystals are formed by diffusion
of atoms from the molten metal to existing nuclei of crystallization.
The crystals extend along certain favored crystallographic directions
and form dendrites. The heat released by the solidifying metal (in
extending the arms of dendrites) reduces supercooling around the
arm, which impedes solidification in affected regions and results in
highly elongated extension of the arms. Subsequently, secondary

extension arms of the dendrites branch off the primary arms, and
tertiary arms off the secondary arms, resulting in a three-dimensional
dendritic structure. Dendrites can also grow perpendicular to the
walls of the mold cavity toward the center of the casting. Numerous
dendritic crystals form and grow until they eventually become large
enough to impinge upon each other. Solidification is completed
when the liquid metal in the interdendritic spaces between the dendrite arms freezes to yield crystals. Each crystal within the solidified
metal is called a grain. Thus a grain is a microscopic single crystal
that has a different orientation from that of the adjacent grains. The
interface between adjacent grains is called a grain boundary. The
solidified metal is also called polycrystalline.
The grain boundaries in a solidified metal are revealed when
examining the microstructure of a polished surface that has
been etched. When a highly polished metal surface is subjected
to a chemical or an electrolytic etching solution, the atoms near
grain boundaries are preferentially removed, creating microscopic
grooves that scatter light because these atoms have higher energy
compared with atoms in the interiors of grains. An as-cast dendritic pattern may be present, like the Pd-based alloy shown in
Figure 2-14, or a dendritic microstructure may not exist, such as
for the high-palladium alloy having an equiaxed grain structure
shown in Figure 2-15. The term equiaxed means that the three
dimensions of each grain are similar, in contrast to the elongated
shape and size of the dendrites in Figure 2-14.

26

PA RT I

3

4

5

6

7

18 VIIIA

1

2

Hydrogen

Helium

H
2

Periodic Table

IA

1

1

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

2

IIA

13 IIIA 14 IVA 15 VA 16 VIA 17 VIIA

He

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Lithium

Beryllium

Boron

Carbon

Nitrogen

Oxygen

Fluorine

Neon

Li

Be

B

C

N

O

F

N

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Sodium

Magnesium

Aluminum

Silicon

Phosphorus

Sulfur

Chlorine

Argon

Al

Si

P

S

Cl

Ar

Na Mg 3 IIIB 4

IVB 5

VIIIB
VB 6 VIB 7 VIIB 8

9

10

11

IB 12 IIB

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

Potassium

Calcium

Scandium

Titanium

Vanadium

Chromium

Manganese

Iron

Cobalt

Nickel

Copper

Zinc

Gallium

Germanium

Arsenic

Selenium

Bromine

Krypton

K

Ca

Sc

Ti

V

Cr

Mn Fe

Co

Ni

Cu

Zn

Ga

Ge

As

Se

Br

Kr

42

43

37

38

39

40

41

Rubidium

Strontium

Yttrium

Zirconium

Niobium

Rb

Sr

Y

Zr

Molybdenum Technetium

Nb Mo

Tc

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

Ruthenium

Rhodium

Palladium

Silver

Cadmium

Indium

Tin

Antimony

Tellurium

Iodine

Xenon

Ru

Rh

Pd

Ag

Cd

In

Sn

Sb

Te

I

Xe

55

56

57-71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

Cesium

Barium

Hafnium

Tantalum

Tungsten

Rhenium

Osmium

Iridium

Platinum

Gold

Mercury

Thallium

Lead

Bismuth

Polonium

Astatine

Radon

Cs

Ba

Series of
Lanthanide
Elements

Hf

Ta

W

Re

Os

Ir

Pt

Au Hg

Tl

Pb

Bi

Po

At

Rn

115

116

87

88

89-103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

Francium

Radium

Rutherfor
dium

Dubnium

Seaborgium

Bohrium

Hassium

Meitnerium

Flerovium

Rf

Db

Sg

Bh

Hs

Roentgenium

Nihonium

Ra

Darmstadtium

Copernicium

Fr

Series of
Actinide
Elements

Mt

Cn

Nh

Fl

60

61

Ds

Rg

Moscovium Livermorium

Mc

Lv

117

118

Tennessine

Oganesson

Ts

Og

Series of
Lanthanide
Elements

57

58

59

Lanthanum

Cerium

Praseodymium

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

Samarium

Europium

Gadolinium

Terbium

Dysprosium

Holmium

Erbium

Thulium

Ytterbium

Lutetium

La

Ce

Pr

Nd Pm Sm

Eu

Gd

Tb

Dy Ho

Er

Tm Yb

Lu

Series of
Actinide
Elements

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

Actinium

Thorium

Protactinium

Uranium

Neptunium

Plutonium

Americium

Curium

Berkelium

Californium

Einsteinium

Fermium

Mendelevium

Nobelium

Lawrencium

Ac

Th

Pa

U

Np

Pu Am Cm Bk

Cf

Es

Neodymium Promethium

Fm Md No

Lr

• Figure 2-12 Periodic chart of the elements.
Figure 2-16 is a schematic illustration of the coalescence of
individual grains to form an equiaxed grain structure. Solidification starts from isolated nuclei in the molten metal, and these
crystals gradually grow by the clustering of atoms and extend
toward each other. When the adjacent crystals are eventually in
contact, their growth stops, as shown in Figure 2-16, E. The final
polished and etched microstructure depicting grain boundaries is
shown in Figure 2-16, F. The grain boundary regions are the last
portions of the molten metal to solidify and can serve as sites for
precipitate formation and sinks for impurity atoms.

Temperature

A

Tf

B

C

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the grain size affect the properties of cast dental alloys?

B'

D
Time

• Figure 2-13 A time–temperature cooling curve for a pure metal, illustrating supercooling.

Grain Refinement and Grain Size
In general, the smaller the grain size of the metal, the better are
its physical properties. For example, the yield strength of many
metals has been found to vary inversely with the square root of
the grain size. Consequently, obtaining a small grain size during
casting is an advantage.

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

• Figure 2-14 Optical microscopic image of a polished and etched palladium-based alloy with a dendritic as-cast microstructure. Higher-magnification scanning electron microscope (SEM) images reveal that the complex interdendritic regions can contain a eutectic constituent. (From Carr
AB, Brantley WA: New high-palladium casting alloys: part 1. Overview and
initial studies. Int J Prosthodont 4:265, 1991. Reproduced with permission
from Quintessence Publishing Company, Inc.)

27

• Figure 2-15 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a polished
and etched high-palladium alloy with an equiaxed fine-grain as-cast microstructure. The white-appearing particles are ruthenium-rich and arise from
the use of ruthenium as a grain-refining element. (From Brantley WA, Cai
Z, Foreman DW, et al: X-ray diffraction studies of as-cast high-palladium
alloys. Dent Mater 11:154, 1995. Reproduced with permission.)

A

B

C

D

E

F

• Figure 2-16 Stages in the formation of metallic grains during the solidification of a molten metal.
(Redrawn from Rosenbain W: Physical metallurgy, ed 2, London, 1928, Contable and Co.)

28

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

There are two variables that can reduce the grain size during
solidification: number of nuclei of crystallization and rate of crystallization. A greater number of nuclei will yield a greater number
of grains, and thus the size of each grain is reduced. As pointed
out previously, the formation of nuclei of crystallization can be
increased by the amount of supercooling and the rate of cooling.
If the crystals grow more rapidly than the formation of nuclei of
crystallization, the grains will be larger than if the reverse condition prevails. Conversely, if the formation of nuclei occurs faster
than the growth of crystals, a small grain size will be obtained.
Consequently, slow cooling results in large grains. In other words,
the more rapidly the liquid state can be changed to the solid state,
the smaller or finer the grains will be. Small concentrations of
high-melting-point metals, such as iridium (Ir), ruthenium (Ru),
or rhenium (Re), are generally added as grain-refining elements to
noble metal casting alloys for dental prostheses.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why should a dentist or lab technician consider both the weight percentage
and the atomic percentage of potentially toxic elements when selecting an
alloy for dental prostheses?

Solid Solutions
We often associate a solution with a liquid; therefore the term solid
solution would appear counterintuitive. In chemistry, a solution
refers to a type of homogeneous mixture composed of two or more
substances. That means we could have a solution in the solid, liquid,
or vapor state. The key word is homogeneous. Consider the palladium-silver (Pd-Ag) alloy system, which is relevant for an important
group of metal-ceramic alloys (Chapter 9, Palladium-Silver Alloys),
as an example. When an alloy in this system is solidified, the silver atoms are distributed randomly in the space lattice of the palladium atoms, thereby forming a solid solution. Because the silver
atoms become integrated into the crystal structure of palladium,
no microstructural evidence of a mechanically removable phase
exists because there is only one phase. The term phase in chemistry is defined as a physically distinctive and homogeneous region
of matter. If the binary Pd-Ag alloy appears to be inhomogeneous
as a result of improper cooling, it can be heat-treated at elevated
temperatures for sufficiently long times to promote solid-state diffusion that ensures the uniform distribution of silver atoms in the
palladium lattice.

Solutes and Solvents
In liquid solutions, the substance present in the greater amount
is the solvent, and the substance of the lesser amount uniformly
dispersed in the solvent is the solute. The same principle applies in
solid solutions, where the solute atoms are uniformly dispersed in
the crystal structure of the solvent atoms. There are two principal
atomic arrangements for solid solutions.
The first type is the substitutional solid solution, in which the
atoms of the solute occupy the positions in the crystal structure
that are normally occupied by the solvent atoms in the pure
metal. For a Pd-Ag alloy, the crystal structure of both elements
is FCC, and Ag atoms replace Pd atoms randomly in the crystal
structure of Pd; Ag is the solute, and Pd is the solvent. The second type is the interstitial solid solution, in which the solute metal
atoms are present in random positions (interstices) between the
atoms in the crystal structure of the solvent metal. This type of
solid solution requires that the solute atoms be much smaller in

diameter than the solvent atoms, and these solid solutions are
usually limited to relatively small concentrations of solute. The
family of carbon steels is an example of an interstitial solid solution of carbon in iron. Another example is commercially pure
titanium (CP Ti), an alloy for implants and restorative dentistry
(Chapter 9, Titanium and Titanium Alloys), which consists of
high-purity (≥99 wt%) titanium, with oxygen, carbon, nitrogen,
and hydrogen atoms dissolved interstitially.

Conditions for Solid Solubility
According to the four Hume–Rothery rules discussed in textbooks
on engineering materials science, the conditions that dictate solubility of metals for forming substitutional solid solutions are as
follows:
1. Type of crystal structure—The crystal structure of the solute
and the solvent metals should be identical.
2. Atom size difference—The atomic radii of the solute and solvent atoms must differ no more than 15%; otherwise, multiple phases occur during solidification.
3. Valence—Solid solutions are more likely to occur when the
solvent and solute atoms have the same valence.
4. Electronegativity—Electronegativity is an atom’s tendency to
attract a bonding pair of electrons. Alloys with a greater difference in electronegativity between the solute and solvent atoms
tend to form intermetallic compounds rather than solid solutions. Intermetallic compound refers to a substance composed of
definite proportions of two or more elemental metals, like AuCu
and AuCu3 in the Au-Cu alloy system to be discussed later.
According to Table 2-2, the difference between the atomic
diameters for Ag and Sn is approximately 4%. However, these two
metals differ in valence and have different crystal structures, so
there is limited solid solubility for Sn in Ag. As the Sn content
increases, an intermetallic compound (Ag3Sn) forms, which is an
important phase in the starting powder for preparing dental amalgams (Chapter 8, Amalgamation).
For an interstitial solid solution, the solute metal atoms must be
smaller than the size of the interstitial spaces in the solvent metal
lattice, and the solute and solvent atoms must have similar electronegativity to avoid the formation of intermetallic compounds.
Mechanical Properties of Solid Solutions
Substituting solute atoms of different sizes in the solvent lattice
causes localized distortion, which is known to improve the
mechanical properties of alloys, such as greater force or pressure
needed to cause deformation of the material. For example,
although pure gold in the cast condition is too soft for restorations, adding only 5 wt% of copper will provide adequate strength
and hardness to the Au-Cu alloy that are sufficient for the casting
to be used for small inlays. Mechanisms of strengthening metals
through alloying will be discussed later in this chapter and in
Chapter 9, Dislocation Movement in Polycrystalline Alloys.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is the study of binary phase diagrams important, even though
dental alloys contain more than three elements and the conditions during
solidification and cooling after casting are far removed from equilibrium?

Equilibrium-Phase Diagrams
A phase diagram shows conditions (pressure, temperature, volume, etc.) at which thermodynamically distinct phases occur

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

29

P
1500

Liquid
R

1400
N
Temperature (°C)

1300

S

Y

T

M
W

B
D

1200
1100
1000
A
900
800
0% Pd 10
100% Ag

Solid
O
20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90 100% Pd
0% Ag

Composition (wt% Pd)

• Figure 2-17 Equilibrium-phase diagram for the palladium-silver system showing percentages by weight.
Only the percentage composition for palladium is given; the percentage composition for silver is determined by subtracting the palladium composition from 100.

and coexist at equilibrium. The phase diagrams in this book are
temperature–composition graphs showing the boundaries of phase
transformation in two-element alloy systems under atmospheric
pressure. For three-component alloy systems, a three-dimensional
(3-D) phase diagram is needed to include the third element but
would be much more complex. (Two-dimensional portrayals of
important ternary phase diagrams for three-component alloy systems are provided in engineering reference texts.) Nevertheless,
binary phase diagrams are useful for understanding the structure
of alloys. Figure 2-17 presents the phase diagram for the solid
solution Pd-Ag system. These two elements exhibit complete solubility in both liquid and solid states. Note the liquid, liquid-plussolid (L + S), and solid regions separated by the liquidus (upper)
and solidus (lower) curves. The liquidus is the boundary between
the liquid and (L + S) regions, and the solidus is the boundary
between the (L + S) and solid regions.

Interpretation of a Solid-Solution Phase Diagram
The dashed line PO in Figure 2-17 represents cooling of a liquid
metal containing 65% Pd and 35% Ag from 1500 °C (point P) to
800 °C (point O). At approximately 1400 °C, line PO intersects
the liquidus at point R, where solidification begins. We can draw a
parallel line through point R that intersects the solidus at point M.
The line RM is called a tie line. The meaning of the tie line is that
the initial solid phase that forms at that temperature should have
the composition of point M, 77% Pd, when projected to the horizontal (composition) axis; the composition of the liquid remains
essentially the same because only a very small amount of solid has
precipitated.
When the temperature decreases to point S (∼1370 °C), the
new compositions of the solid and liquid phase may be determined by the tie line YW, a parallel line drawn through point S
intersecting the liquidus at point Y and the solidus at point W.

Projecting points Y and W to the horizontal axis shows that the
solid formed is 71% Pd and the remaining liquid phase is 57%
Pd. When the vertical cooling line intersects with the solidus at
point T (∼1340 °C), the tie line NT shows that if there is any liquid left at this temperature, the remaining liquid should have the
composition of 52% Pd (point N). Most if not all of the liquid has
converted to solid with 65% Pd (point T). When the temperature
decreases below point T, the alloy is entirely solid, with a composition of 65% palladium.
It should be reemphasized that the phase diagram describes
the equilibrium state of the alloy for the different compositions–
temperature conditions. The cooling process would have to be
held at each of the foregoing temperatures for a prolonged time
sufficient for atomic diffusion to enable the approach to equilibrium conditions for both the liquid and solid phases.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does solidification of metal alloys from fluid state always yield a solid with
inhomogeneous microstructure?

Coring and Homogenization Heat Treatment
In practice, cooling of a casting does not allow phases in the alloy
to reach equilibrium at each temperature before solidification is
completed. For example, the first stable nucleus that forms at the
temperature point R (or slightly below) in Figure 2-17 is richer
than 65% Pd. As the solidification continues with temperature
decreasing, the Pd content in the liquid decreases so that each succeeding “layer” that solidifies on this nucleus will have reduced Pd
content and increased Ag content than the previous layer. Before
reaching the solidus temperature (point T) in Figure 2-17, the
composition (point N) of the remaining liquid to solidify between
the outermost layers of the adjacent solid particles would have

30

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Ag richer than 35%. The solid particles (dendrites or grains) have
what is termed a cored structure, with the composition varying
from the center (containing more Pd) to the outer surface (containing less Pd). Thus the central portion of each particle contains
larger amounts of the component with the higher solidification
temperature (Pd), and the outer portions contain larger amounts
of the component with the lower solidification temperature (Ag).
It follows, because more atomic diffusion would be required to
achieve near-equilibrium compositions, that the larger the temperature range between liquidus and solidus, the greater is the
tendency toward coring.
A cored structure represents an inhomogeneous microstructure,
making alloys more prone to tarnish and corrosion (Chapter 3,
Heterogeneous Surface Composition). For Pd-Ag alloys, it is
necessary to have Pd dispersed uniformly for providing tarnish
and corrosion resistance in the oral environment (which causes
silver to tarnish). Alloys with heterogeneous microstructures have
greater resistance to permanent deformation than alloys with
homogeneous microstructures, as discussed in Chapter 9, Dislocation Movement in Polycrystalline Alloys. The ductility of an alloy
that is single phase under equilibrium conditions increases after
a homogenization heat treatment that eliminates nonequilibrium
secondary phases.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the advantages and disadvantages of eutectic alloys? How do the
alloy compositions of binary eutectic systems affect their properties?

Eutectic Alloys
When the two metals in a binary system have the same crystal
structure but limited mutual solid solubility, the phase diagram
may include two solid solutions, one rich in the first metal and one
rich in the second metal. Figure 2-18 shows a phase diagram for
the Ag-Cu system and a schematic microstructure of each phase.
Three phases can be observed: a liquid phase (L), a silver-rich substitutional solid-solution phase (α) containing a small percentage
of copper atoms, and a copper-rich substitutional solid-solution
1100
1000

a

b

c

phase (β) containing a small percentage of silver atoms. The solidus curve is the boundary line ABEFD, and the liquidus curve is
AED. In the α + β region (CBEFG), both solid solutions exist.
Note that the alloy composition represented by point E has the
lowest melting point of the alloy system. The composition of
point E is known as the eutectic composition, 28% Cu and 72%
Ag, for the Ag-Cu alloy system. Because point E is also on the
solidus curve, the eutectic composition should solidify completely
at a single temperature (the eutectic temperature) that is referred
to as an invariant point.

Phase Changes of Eutectic Alloys
The Ag-Cu phase diagram (Figure 2-18, A) represents a typical
binary eutectic phase diagram and is used in the following discussion of the phase changes that can occur during cooling. Line
ABC (termed a solvus line) shows the solid solubility of Cu in
silver for the α solid solution as the temperature changes; this solid
solubility reaches a maximum at point B (∼9% at 780 °C). Solvus
line DFG shows that the solid solubility of Ag in Cu reaches a
maximum at point F (∼8% at 780 °C) but has a very low value at
300 °C (point G).
The eutectic liquid composition solidifies at a single temperature to a solid phase comprising two phases (α and β). A lamellar
structure with alternating layers of the α and β phases typically
forms, such as shown in Figure 2-18, B, because a minimal
amount of diffusion is required to produce the needed segregation
of the two different atom species.
Figure 2-18, B illustrates phase-transformation equilibrium
cooling of five different alloy compositions in the Ag-Cu system. For the molten 5% Cu alloy (line a), cooling to the (L + α)
region causes precipitation of α crystals within the liquid. Further
cooling past line AB results in complete solidification of the alloy
to α solid solution. As the alloy is cooled further, the solubility
limit at line BC forces precipitation of β solid solution within α,
typically at grain boundaries or interdendritic regions. There is
no eutectic microstructure for this alloy composition because the
cooling (vertical dashed line) does not cross the eutectic isotherm
line (line BEF). When the cooling of a liquid-phase (line b) alloy
containing 12% Cu crosses points AE, crystals of α emerge in the

d D

Liquid

Liquid

A

Temperature (°C)

900

α solid
solution

L +α

800

L+ β

E

a

a

a, b

c, d

d

d

β solid
solution

F

B

700
600

Solid
(α + β)

500

β precipitates in
α solid solution
(α+β)

b
α in liquid
(L+α)

E

c
β in liquid
(L+β)

α precipitates in
β solid solution
(α+β)

400
300 C
0% Cu
100% Ag

A

G

20

40

60

Composition (wt% Cu)

80

100% Cu
0% Ag

B

α crystals in
eutectic structure
(α+β)

100%
eutectic structure
(α+β)

• Figure 2-18 Equilibrium-phase diagram of a eutectic alloy. A, Silver-copper system showing percentages by weight. B, Diagram of all possible phase transformations in the silver-copper system. Note that
the ratio of phases is not to the scale of the composition.

β crystals in
eutectic structure
(α+β)

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

liquid. When this alloy cools past line BEF, the remaining liquid
forms a lamellar eutectic structure around existing α crystals. The
amount of the eutectic constituent in the microstructure of the
solid alloy depends on how close the alloy composition is to the
eutectic composition. For the alloy containing 80% Cu (line c),
the changes in composition during cooling are similar as in line
b, except that now the first solid to form as crystals in the liquid
phase is the β solid solution. At a temperature below points BEF,
this alloy will have β crystals surrounded by the lamellar eutectic
structure. For the molten 94% Cu alloy (line d), the sequence of
phase transformation is the same as in line a, except that it forms
β solid solution instead.

Physical Properties and Application of Eutectic Alloys
Alloys that contain the eutectic constituent in their microstructures are relatively brittle, whereas alloys with microstructures
lacking the eutectic constituent are ductile. Alloy embrittlement
occurs because the alternating lamellae of the α and β phases
inhibit the movement of dislocations, which increases strength
and hardness but decreases ductility. The tarnish resistance of
these alloys without the eutectic constituent is superior to that of
the alloys containing this constituent.
Eutectic alloys have several important applications in dentistry
because they correspond to a composition with the lowest melting point in an alloy system. They can be used as filler metals in
the processes of brazing or soldering (Chapter 9, Joining of Dental
Alloys). The Ag-Cu eutectic composition is also used to produce
spherical particles that are combined with Ag3Sn lathe-cut particles
to be reacted with mercury to form a dispersed-phase dental amalgam (Chapter 8, Composition).

Peritectic Alloys
Like the eutectic transformation, the peritectic reaction is an
invariant reaction that occurs at a particular composition and
temperature. Figure 2-19 is the phase diagram for the Ag-Pt alloy
system, which is useful for instructional purposes, although there
is no Ag-Pt dental alloy. The pure metals Ag and Pt have the
FCC structure. Rather than the difference in atomic radii, the
dominant factor is the considerably greater difference in melting temperature for Ag and Pt compared with Ag and Cu. The α
phase in the Ag-Pt system is silver-rich, the β phase is platinumrich, and the two-phase (α + β) region results from the limited
solid solubility of less than approximately 12% Ag in Pt at 700
°C (point F). Figure 2-19 also shows that the equilibrium solid
solubility of Pt in Ag is approximately 56% at 700 °C (point
G). The peritectic transformation occurs at point P (alloy II),
where the liquid (composition at point B) and the platinum-rich
β phase (composition at point D) transform into the platinumrich α phase (composition at point P). For a composition, such
as exists for alloy I, cooling through the peritectic temperature
results in the transformation of the liquid and β phase (L + β)
to the α phase, with some of the liquid phase remaining (L + α).
For both of these transformations, the α phase forms at the interface between the liquid and β phase. Because extensive diffusion
is required in these phases for the transformation to occur, peritectic alloys are highly susceptible to coring during rapid cooling.
This cored structure has inferior corrosion resistance and is more
brittle than the homogeneous solid-solution phase. The peritectic
reaction in the Ag-Sn system is of great importance for the alloy
that reacts with mercury to form dental amalgam for restorations,
as discussed in Chapter 8, The Silver-Tin System.

31

1900
A

Liquid (L)
1700

Temperature (°C)

CHAPTER 2

I

II

1500

1300
B

P

L+

D

α+
1100

900

L+
H
G

700
0% Pt
100% Ag

20

40
60
80
Composition (wt% Pt)

F
100% Pt
0% Ag

• Figure 2-19 Equilibrium-phase diagram of the platinum-silver system
showing percentages by weight.

Solid-State Reactions in High-Noble and Noble
Alloy Systems
The strength and hardness in some metal alloys may be manipulated by the presence or absence of uniformly dispersed fine particles or certain phases within the original matrix phase. The
process can be achieved via a solid-state reaction (i.e., a controlled
heating and cooling protocol, also called heat treatment) without
changing the configuration of the object. The best-known example is the ordering of Au-Cu alloys.

CRITICAL QUESTION
By which two mechanisms does copper provide strengthening and hardening
of gold casting alloys?

Gold-Copper System
Figure 2-20 presents the Au-Cu phase diagram, where both
weight and atomic percentages are shown. The melting range
between the solid and liquid phases is narrow for all compositions, and the liquidus and solidus curves meet at 80.1 wt%
Au. At the lower half of the diagram, there are two arch-shaped
regions. One arch spans the composition range between 40 and
65 wt% Au and peaks at 390 °C with 50.8 wt% Au (α′). The
atomic ratio of Au to Cu at the peak is 1:3, indicating the formation of the intermetallic compound AuCu3 in this region. The
second arch spans the composition range between 65 and 85
wt% Au and peaks at 410 °C with 75.6 wt% Au (α2′′). The
atomic ratio of Au to Cu at this peak is 1:1, indicating the formation of intermetallic compound AuCu in this region. The α
solid solution that forms when the alloys initially solidify has a
disordered structure in which the Au and Cu atoms randomly
occupy the lattice sites (Figure 2-21, A).The AuCu and AuCu3
phases have new crystal structures that differ from the parent
FCC α solid solutions of Au and Cu atoms that form when the
alloys initially solidify at elevated temperatures below the solidus
curve (Figure 2-21, B & C). These phases in the regions under

32

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Atomic percentage gold
0
1100

10

20

30

40

50

60

70 80 90

1084.5°
1064.43°

1050
L
1000

Temperature (°C)

950

911°, 80.1%

900
(Cu, Au)
450

410°, 75.6%
390°, 50.8%

400

385°

2

350

300
285°
1

250

200

240°

Cu

10

20

Donald T. Hawkins

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Au

Weight percentage gold

• Figure 2-20 Equilibrium-phase diagram for the gold-copper system. (The temperature range between
450 and 900 °C has been condensed.) (With permission from Metals handbook, ed 8, vol 8, Metals Park,
OH, 1973, American Society for Metals, p 267.)

Gold
Copper
Gold or

A
B
C
Copper
• Figure 2-21 Structure of Au-Cu alloy. A, Disordered substitutional solid solution. B, Superlattice of
AuCu3. C, Superlattice of AuCu.

the two arches are called ordered because the Au and Cu atoms
occupy specific locations in the lattices.
Because the crystal structure of the ordered phase (termed a
superlattice) differs from that of the gold α solid solution, each
region of the ordered phase is surrounded by a localized elastic
strain field, which is necessary to maintain the continuity of
atomic bonds across the interface between the ordered phase and
the matrix α phase. As a result, it requires greater strength to cause
plastic deformation of the alloys (Chapter 9, Dislocation Movement in Polycrystalline Alloys).

Rapid cooling of a molten gold alloy in a room-temperature
water bath or an ice-water bath (also known as quenching) does not
allow sufficient time for atomic diffusion to form the ordered structure. The disordered solid solution is retained at room temperature,
and the gold alloy is relatively soft and ductile. Bench cooling of the
same gold alloy through the temperature range of ordered phase formation allows enough atomic diffusion for partial transformation
to an ordered structure that provides the additional and strength.
Clinically, a type 3 or 4 gold alloy casting can be quenched after
initial solidification to retain a soft disordered structure, which

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

allows easier adjustment of the casting, such as the margin, and then
reheated to a specific temperature within the ordered-phase region
(e.g., 400 °C) for a period of time as recommended by the manufacturer and quenched to yield the stronger and harder ordered alloy.
This process is called age-hardening heat treatment.
To reverse the hardened type 3 or 4 gold alloy castings to their
softened condition, the casting is heated to a temperature below
the solidus temperature (e.g., 700 °C), holding for approximately
10 minutes to convert the alloy to the disordered substitutional
solid solution, and then quenched to retain the disordered phase.
The process is called a solution heat treatment.
It should be noted that the quenched, softened condition for
types 3 and 4 gold alloys is metastable, and slow increases in hardness and strength will occur with time under room-temperature or
intraoral conditions as a result of low-temperature ordering.

Other Noble Alloys for Dental Applications
Dental gold casting alloys may contain solute metals (Cu, Pd, and
Pt), which provide solid-solution strengthening, along with minor
amounts (<1%) of Zn or Ir forming precipitates, leading to age
hardening. Because commercial dental alloys contain multiple elements, interactions between solute atom species have the potential
to influence microstructures and mechanical properties. Because of
elemental microsegregation during rapid solidification and cooling,
phases may be observed in cast dental alloys that would not occur
under equilibrium conditions for the same alloy compositions. Furthermore, the compositions of phases in multicomponent alloys will
generally be more complex than in binary alloys. In principle, under
equilibrium conditions, each phase in an alloy will contain some
amount (which may be minuscule) of each component element.
It is important to note another effective age-hardening mechanism in gold alloys: formation of the FePt3 intermetallic compound, which provides strengthening of the original high-gold
alloys for metal-ceramic prostheses (Chapter 9, Au-Pt-Pd Alloys).

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are there substantial differences between the microstructures and
strengthening mechanisms for the high-palladium alloys and the palladiumsilver alloys?

Palladium-Based Alloys
Palladium-based alloys are very important for ceramic applications (Chapter 9, High Noble and Noble Alloys). The high-palladium alloys are based on the Pd-Ga system, in which there is an
eutectic composition at the high-palladium-content side of the
phase diagram, and complex precipitation reactions potentially
occur at lower temperatures. For Pd-Cu-Ga alloys, both the rapid
cooling rate during solidification and the addition of copper shift
the Pd-Ga eutectic composition to higher percentages of palladium that result in the formation of a Pd2Ga eutectic phase in the
cast microstructure. Both Pd-Cu-Ga alloys and the Pd-Ga alloys
have a fine submicron “tweed” structure that can be observed
by transmission electron microscopy. This structure appears to
form by a martensitic phase transformation in the FCC structure
of the palladium solid-solution matrix and remains stable during the firing cycles for dental porcelain. Strengthening of these
alloys occurs by the solid-solution mechanism and by the formation of Pd5Ga2 precipitates in some Pd-Cu-Ga alloy compositions. In contrast, the Pd-Ag alloys are based on the binary alloy
system discussed earlier in this chapter and have much simpler
microstructures than the high-palladium alloys, with secondary

33

phases forming in the Pd solid-solution matrix because of the
solute atoms in the alloy compositions. Heat treatment of these
alloys can cause microstructural changes that significantly affect
mechanical properties.

Multicomponent Dental Alloy Systems
Various age-hardening mechanisms have been employed (often
empirically) by alloy manufacturers, and these may vary depending on the alloy composition. There are many possible ternary
alloys, quaternary alloys, and higher-order multicomponent alloy
systems that can be used for restorative dentistry. Such systems
are complex, and the phase-diagram data available are extremely
limited. Thus binary phase diagrams are often used to estimate the
effect of individual elements on the phases formed, along with the
resulting microstructures of these cast alloys. However, such equilibrium diagrams should be interpreted carefully because actual
casting and cooling processes reflect nonequilibrium conditions.

Ceramics
Ceramics are solid-phase compounds of metallic and nonmetallic
elements. Recall that the valence electrons of metallic atoms can be
transferred to nonmetallic atoms or groups of atoms with outer shells
that are nearly complete with electrons to form stable compounds
by ionic bonds, and that nonmetallic atoms may also share electrons
to form another kind of compound by covalent bonding. Both scenarios deprive compounds of free electrons, thus making them poor
conductors of heat and electrical current. Even though they comprise
metallic elements but lack characteristics of metal substance, ceramics are considered nonmetallic, inorganic structures.
In the search for the ideal restorative material, dental ceramics have become attractive because of their biocompatibility,
long-term color stability, chemical durability, wear resistance,
and ability to be formed into precise shapes, although in some
cases, ceramics require costly processing equipment and specialized training for lab technicians. In this segment, we will discuss
the general structure of ceramics and how the structure affects the
mechanical properties of ceramics. Further information on the
structure, properties, benefits, and drawbacks of specific ceramic
materials used for crown and bridge prostheses will be provided,
along with recent developments in dental ceramics.

Structure of Ceramics
Like metals, ceramics have 3-D crystalline structures, but they
are much more complicated than those of metals because they
need to accommodate different kinds of atoms, maintain electric
charge neutrality within the unit cell, and achieve high packing efficiency. Normally, the metallic elements lose their original
crystalline structure and adopt a new one. Consider magnesium
oxide (MgO), a significant ingredient in investment materials
(Chapter 14, Phosphate-Bonded Investment) and modern dental
ceramics (Chapter 10, Ceramic-Ceramic or All-Ceramic Systems);
Mg in metallic crystal has a hexagonal structure (Figure 2-9, F), and
the structure of MgO, which is the same as NaCl (Figure 2-7, B),
shows that anions O2– (large orange spheres) retain an FCC structure, whereas Mg2+ ions (small blue spheres) are in the interstitial
locations because they are smaller in size. Current dental ceramics
are based on silicate ([SiO4]4– tetrahedron), alumina (Al2O3), and
zirconia (ZrO2).
Soda–lime glass is a silicate-based material commonly used for
windowpanes, glass containers (bottles and jars), and artworks.

34

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

1

2
3

4

1

2

5

-

+

-

+

-

+

-

+

-

+

+

-

+

-

+

-

+

-

+

-

A 3 4 5
B
• Figure 2-22 Comparison of slip. A, Monoatomic metals of Au. B, Biatomic ceramic of MgO; Mg is
shown by the blue spheres, and oxygen is shown by the gray spheres. More force is required to displace
atoms because of attraction between different atoms and repulsion between similar atoms.

It is manufactured by melting raw materials, which are silica,
soda, lime, and a small quantity of varieties of metallic oxides.
It has all the ingredients needed to form crystalline structures,
but the composition used in soda–lime glass yields short-range,
repetitive-order structures. Therefore, ceramic materials with a
short-range repetitive order of their structural units are usually
called glasses or glassy phase, which are also transparent to the
light. Glassy phases of ceramic melt at lower temperature. They
play an important role in the fabrication of ceramic-based prostheses (Chapter 10, Metal-Ceramic Systems).
The complexity of crystalline and the strong bonds holding
the atoms together make the solid-state reactions of ceramic sluggish. At a normal cooling rate, the ceramic does not have enough
time to arrange itself into the complicated crystalline structure
it could achieve. We, nonetheless, can subject these materials to
a heat treatment like that of Au-Cu system by nucleation and
growth of crystals in the glass-matrix phase. This type of material
is used in dentistry to balance the translucency and opacity of the
prostheses. They are called glass-ceramics (Chapter 10, CeramicCeramic or All-Ceramic Systems).
Most metal-forming operations depend on the casting of
molten metal and/or mechanical forming of the metal. These
operations are rarely used in ceramic-forming operations because
of the high melting point and almost extreme brittleness (no
ductility) of ceramics. We will learn in Chapter 10, History of
Dental Ceramics, that fabricating dental ceramics into prosthetic shapes and configurations is conducted through one of
the three categories of processes: sintering, hot isostatic pressing, and computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing
(CAD-CAM) (see also Chapter 15, Prototyping Tools). A prosthesis is first sculpted out of dental ceramic powder with the
help of a binder, which is followed by a heating process called
sintering. During sintering, the packed ceramic particles are densified and agglomerate to the intended form. Primary bonding
occurs between the particles by liquid-phase sintering with a
glassy phase, or solid-state sintering. The preparation of hot isostatic pressing is like metal casting, except that dental ceramic is
not melted but softened enough to be pressed into a mold with
a cavity of the shape of the prosthesis. CAD-CAM comprises all
processes that require the use of a computer to control the making of prostheses. Each of the three structures of the ceramics
discussed earlier can be formulated to facilitate each of the three
fabrication processes.

Mechanical Properties of Ceramics
Most ceramic materials are described as brittle; that is, they are
incapable of large deformations without fracture. Let us examine
the deformation of a metal (Au) and a ceramic (MgO) in terms

of atoms’ movement between two rows of atoms (Figure 2-22) in
response to a pair of forces pushing the top row right and bottom
row left. In the case of metal, every atom in the top row must break
a metallic bond with one atom and reconnect with another one
in the bottom row. For example, atom 2 breaks a metallic bond
with atom 3, and then reconnects with atom 5. The coordination
arrangement is the same as before (Figure 2-22, A). This kind of
movement is called slip, and the interphase where it occurs is called
a slip plane. In the case of ceramic, which consists of Mg2+ and O2–
ions, a similar movement necessitates the breaking of strong ionic
bonds, like the gold atoms need to break metallic bonds. Before the
ions complete the transition to restore the original atomic arrangements, they must overcome the high-energy positive–positive and
negative–negative repulsion forces when they encounter ions of the
same charge (Figure 2-22, B). The entire process requires a tremendous expenditure of energy. This requirement restricts the mechanism of slip in ceramic materials.
Thus slip restriction makes ceramic materials brittle and more
resistant to fracture under compression but not under tension. In
practice, defects such as pores within the bulk and cracks on the
surface are often introduced during processing, production, and
handling. These irregularities produce stress concentrations in a
material (Chapter 4, Stress Concentration). For ductile materials,
such as gold, the stress concentration can be relieved by atomic
slippage. For brittle materials, the stress concentration cannot be
relieved and can easily exceed the tensile strength of the materials,
causing fracture. Under compression, defects like cracks do not
accentuate the stress. Thus, ceramic materials are much stronger in
compression than in tension. The role of defects in the longevity
of ceramic-based prostheses and means of minimizing the impact
of these defects are discussed in Chapter 10, Minimizing the Effect
of Stress Concentrations.

Polymers
Polymers are a class of natural or synthetic substances composed of
very high-molecular-weight molecules with repeating units, called
macromolecules. For synthetic polymers, each repeating unit is
called mer in the polymer and a monomer before becoming part
of the macromolecule by a chemical reaction called polymerization. The main chain of a macromolecule is called the backbone.
Generally, resin is a solid or highly viscous substance of plant or
synthetic origin that is typically convertible into polymers. For our
purpose, resins are compositions of either monomers or macromolecules blended with other components to provide a material,
after polymerization, with a useful set of properties.
Synthetic resins polymerize randomly from activated local
sites. Thus, depending on the ability of the chains to grow from
their local activation sites, the molecular chains that form within

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

a polymeric material will vary in length, shape, and structure.
Although the primary bonds are holding the atoms within a
polymer chain, there are secondary bonds and/or hydrogen
bonds between polymer chains. In addition, polymer chains
often become entangled, adding complexity to the structure. As
a result, many physical and mechanical properties are determined
largely by intermolecular forces. In this section, we will discuss
the nature of polymers, their physical and mechanical properties,
and polymerization. Restorative, bonding, and prosthodontic
applications of polymers are discussed in Chapters 5, 6, and 11,
respectively.

Fundamental Nature of Polymers
Polymerization is a repetitive intermolecular chain-growth reaction that can proceed almost indefinitely, sometimes reaching
molecular weights as high as 50 million. The two most significant
features of polymers are very large molecules and virtually limitless
chain configurations and conformations.

35

more growing chains (Figure 2-24). Because of the interlinking
of many chain backbones, a highly crosslinked polymeric material can consist of just a few giant molecules or even a single
giant molecule.

Copolymer Structures
Polymers that have only one type of repeating unit (mer) are
homopolymers; those with two or more types of mer units are
known as copolymers. There are three different types of copolymers by the arrangement of repeating units:
• Random copolymer—No sequential order exists among the
two or more mer units along the polymer chain.
AAAAAABBBBBAAAABBBBBBAAAAABB
• Block copolymer—Identical monomer units occur in relatively
long sequences (blocks) along the main polymer chain.
AAAAAABBBBBAAAABBBBBBAAAAABBB

Molecular Weight
Because of the various length of chains in the polymer, a method
of expressing an “average” molecular weight of a heterogeneous
polymer is needed for the overall molecular
− weight of polymers.
The number average molecular weight (M n) is the total weight of
a polymer divided by the overall number of molecules present in
the material. The number of molecules can be obtained by measuring the osmotic pressure−of the polymer solution. The weight
average molecular weight (M w), which can be obtained by light
scattering of the same polymer solution, is the sum of molecular
weight of polymer chains multiplied their respective weight fraction. The International System (SI) unit for the molecular weight
of polymers is the same as that of nonpolymer compounds; it is g/
mol and is also known as Dalton (Da).
−
−
Considering the concepts just discussed, the ratio (M w)/(M n)
(called the polydispersity) of a polymer is a measure of the range
and
− distribution of chain sizes. Polymers with an equal value of
(M w) but different values of polydispersity will exhibit somewhat
different properties. For example, polymers of higher polydispersity will begin to melt at a lower temperature and have a larger
temperature range of melting.
Chain Branching and Crosslinking
It is possible for a growing polymer chain to branch and lose its
linear form (Figure 2-23). Branching is analogous to extra arms
growing out of a backbone polymer chain; thus the probability
of entangled chains increases. When a monomer has more than
one site for growing a chain, it can chemically connect two or

Linear

Branched

• Figure 2-24 A crosslinked structure is formed by copolymerization,
where at least one comonomer is multifunctional. Here, methylmethacrylate is copolymerized with ethylene glycol dimethacrylate.

Crosslinked

• Figure 2-23 Schematic diagrams of linear, branched, and crosslinked polymers.

36

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

• Graft or branched copolymer—Sequences of one type of
mer unit (B) are “grafted” onto a backbone chain of a second
(A) type of mer unit to form a branched configuration (see
Figure 2-23).
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B

Molecular Organization
In most polymers, the chains are coiled and entangled in a very
random pattern known as an amorphous structure (Figure 2-25,
left). In others, the chains align themselves to form a highly ordered
region, like that of crystalline structures (Figure 2-25, right). Most
polymeric materials combine these two forms of organization in
greater or lesser proportions. Characteristically, the dental polymers are predominantly amorphous, with little or no crystallinity.
The polymer chains form a tangled mass, analogous to cooked
spaghetti, in which each spaghetti string is a mile or so long. Such
polymer segments have little chance to migrate and are immobile
in the solid state.
However, many linear polymers have regions of long-range
ordering that produce a degree of crystallinity depending on the
secondary bonds that can be formed, the structure of the polymer
chain, the degree of ordering, and the molecular weight. Polymer crystallinity usually increases strength, rigidity, hardness, and
melting temperature but at the price of reduced ductility—that is,
increased brittleness. Factors that reduce or prevent crystallinity
and increase amorphous character include the following:
• Copolymer formation, which inhibits polymer chain alignment
• Polymer-chain branching, which also interferes with chain
alignment
• Random arrangement of substituent groups, particularly large
side groups that keep polymer chains separated.

Physical and Mechanical Properties of Polymers
The performance of polymers depends on the interaction between
polymer chains and their response to external stimuli. These properties can be grouped into four interrelated categories: mechanical, rheometric, dissolution, and thermal.

Mechanical Properties—Deformation and Recovery
In the absence of crosslinking, only relatively weak interpolymerchain bonds (van der Waals and hydrogen bonds) are available to
hold the polymer chains together in a solid state. Chain slippage
decreases as chain length increases because the bonds between
chains, together with chain entanglements, resist dislodgment
of the individual chains. At a certain chain length, the resistance
provided by interchain bonds and entanglements becomes strong
enough to exceed the covalent bond strength of the carbon–carbon bonds along the backbone chains. At this critical chain length,
an applied force can rupture chains rather than dislodge them and
cause one chain to slide past another. This balance between the
strength of the interchain bonds and the covalent bonds along
the backbone chains explains why the physical and mechanical
properties of polymers increase with increased molecular weight
up to a certain point. Subsequently, increased molecular weight
becomes less important.
Although dependent on its type, a resin generally develops
mechanical strength only when its degree of polymerization is relatively high, in the range of approximately 150 to 200 recurring mer
units. Above this molecular weight, there is very little increase in
strength with further polymerization. Likewise, the molecular-weight
distribution of the polymer plays an important role in determining
physical properties. In general, a narrow distribution of molecular
weight yields the most useful balance among required properties.
Long side chains extending from the main backbone chain
(i.e., chain branching) generally produce a weaker resin with a
lower softening temperature in comparison with linear-chain
(nonbranched) polymers. This weakening occurs because the side
chains act to separate the main chains, thus reducing the chainto-chain attractive forces. This is the plasticizing effect discussed
further in the following section on solvation. However, if the side

• Figure 2-25 Schematic diagram of polymers that contain only amorphous intermolecular and intramolecular organization (left) and combinations of both amorphous and crystalline regions (shaded areas on right).

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

chains can react with adjacent chains to form a crosslinked polymer, the strength of the polymer is increased.

Rheometric Properties
The rheometry, or flow behavior, of solid polymers involves a combination of elastic and plastic deformation, followed by elastic
recovery after the stresses are eliminated. The chain length, number of crosslinks, temperature, and rate of force application (fast
impact versus slow extension) determine which type of behavior
dominates. A force applied to polymers for an extended period
causes the material to undergo all of the following deformations:
elastic strain, plastic strain, and viscoelastic strain.
1. Elastic strain is reversible deformation and will be quickly and
completely recovered when the force is eliminated, as the result
of polymer chains uncoiling, and then recoiling (Figure 2-26).
2. Plastic strain is irreversible deformation that cannot be recovered and results in a new, permanent shape as a result of slippage among polymer chains (Figure 2-27).
3. Viscoelastic strain is a combination of elastic and plastic deformation mentioned in 1 and 2. The elastic portion of the
viscoelastic strain will recover when the force is removed,
but the recovery takes time to complete because the elastic
recovery process is impeded by the viscous flow resistance
among chains. The amount of deformation that is not recovered over time is the plastic deformation.
Solvation and Dissolution Properties
When a polymer is immersed in a liquid solvent, it can absorb the
solvent, swell, soften, and may even dissolve in the solvent. If the
polymer–solvent interactions are higher than the polymer–polymer
attraction forces, the polymer chain segment starts to absorb solvent
molecules, increase the volume of the polymer matrix, and become
solvated in the solvent. It, however, is a slow process. The longer
the chains extend, the more slowly the polymer dissolves. Crosslinking provides enough bridges between linear chains to form a
3-D network that decreases solvent sorption, making the polymer
nonsoluble. Elastomer, a rubber-like material that is lightly crosslinked, can swell more easily and to a greater extent than do plastics
but does not dissolve. Crystalline regions having higher polymer–
polymer interaction act as physical crosslinks, reducing swelling and
solubility. Chain branching should increase solubility.
The ability to absorb lower-molecular-weight compounds
makes it possible to modify the properties of polymers by a process

called plasticization. Low-molecular-weight compounds, known
as plasticizers, are often added to resins to lower their softening
or melting/fusion temperatures, making a resin that is normally
hard and stiff at room temperature, flexible, and soft. For example, polyvinylchloride (PVC) pipe is hard and rigid, whereas PVC
water-line tubing is soft and elastic and contains a very high level of
plasticizer. In recent years, certain plasticizers, particularly phthalates, have received public attention as a potential ingestion hazard
in the soft plastics used in infants’ and children’s toys.
A plasticizer acts to partially neutralize the secondary bonds or
intermolecular attractions that normally prevent the resin chains
from slipping past one another (i.e., undergoing plastic flow) when
the material is stressed. In some cases, this action is analogous to
that of a solvent, with the plasticizing agent penetrating between
the chains and increasing the intermolecular spacing. This type of
plasticizer is referred to as an external plasticizer because it is not a
part of the host polymer structure. Its molecular attraction to the
host polymer should be high to minimize volatilization or leachout during the fabrication or subsequent use of the resin.
Plasticizing can also be accomplished by copolymerization with
a suitable comonomer. In this case, the plasticizing agent becomes
part of the polymer and acts as an internal plasticizer. For example,
when butyl methacrylate is added to methylmethacrylate before
polymerization, the polymerized resin is plasticized internally by
the bulky butyl-methacrylate segment. The pendant butyl-methacrylate groups occupy extra space between chains and increase
intermolecular spacing, which enhances plastic flow. Plasticizers
usually reduce the strength, hardness, and softening temperature
of the resin. For example, both types of plasticizers are used to
help form soft, cushioning liners for dentures.

Thermal Properties
Polymers can be reshaped into many configurations, depending
on whether the polymeric material is a “thermoset” or a “thermoplastic.” Thermoplastic polymers soften when heated above
Tg, the temperature where secondary bonds weaken, and the resin
softens and becomes ductile or rubbery (Figure 2-28). Above the
Tg, the resin can then be shaped and molded and, upon cooling, retains the new configuration. This process can be repeated
almost indefinitely. Thermoplastic resins are made of linear and/
or branched chains. Without crosslinking, covalent bonds holding
chains together, a polymer can soften (and eventually melt) above
Tg and is usually soluble in organic solvents.

Loading
continued

Loaded

Stretching only

Unloaded

No additional stretching

Full recovery

• Figure 2-26 Elastic recovery: spring-like behavior (rapid and reversible). Chains uncoil, but they do
not slip past one another because of crystalline regions, entanglements, or crosslinks. Thus they recoil
completely when unloaded.

Loaded

Unloaded

Stretching only

Loading
continues

37

Slipping occurrs
(Quantity of slippage depends
on the duration of loading)

Partial recovery with
permanent deformation

• Figure 2-27 Viscoelastic recovery: chains stretch and uncoil and also slip past one another, producing
plastic, irreversible, permanent distortion, and partial recovery when unloaded.

38

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

In contrast, thermoset polymers are formed by heating a precursor mixture, which initiates polymerization, and the ensuing
chemical changes render it rigid after cooling. Resins are crosslinked in this state, and thus, they are insoluble and will not melt
when heated beyond their glass-transition temperature but instead
become rubbery (Figure 2-28). In this manner, the chains are rendered more flexible when heated, and the crosslinks prevent chain
slippage and reshaping. Thermoset resins decompose if heated to a
high enough temperature.
If two otherwise-similar linear polymers are compared, the
one with the higher molecular weight will also have a higher
Tg. This is because as the length of the linear-polymer chain is
increased, the number of bond sites increases along that chain.

Thermalplastc amorphous

Glassy
State

Stiffness/Modulus (MPa)

In addition, the longer length of the chain increases the chance
for
− chain entanglements. The number average molecular weight
(M n) is indicative of both Tg and the strength of the polymer. As
the temperature increases, thermally induced rotations and vibrations among polymer segments increase. This molecular motion
forces chains apart, breaks bonds, increases thermal expansion,
and facilitates chain disentanglement. These factors, in turn,
induce chain slippage and explain the thermoplastic behavior of a
resin when the temperature exceeds Tg. As the degree of crosslinking increases, slippage is progressively reduced, and the material
becomes progressively more resistant to thermal softening.
Figure 2-29 illustrates the effect of the size and configuration of
pendant groups on the Tg of poly(methacrylate) ester compounds.
The figure shows that Tg decreases from 125 °C for the shorter
methyl group to 33 °C for the longer n-butyl group. The isomer
of respective groups, because of compact configuration, results in
a smaller reduction of Tg.

Chemistry of Polymerization

Glass
Transition
State

Traditionally, there are two classes of polymers as determined by
the polymerization mechanism: addition and condensation
polymers. Addition polymers contain the same atoms as the
monomer in their repeating units, whereas condensation polymers contain fewer atoms because of the formation of by-products during the process. Emphasis, however, has changed to
classify polymerization as to whether the process occurs between
the functional groups of polymer chains in steps or by propagating of a growing chain by taking in monomers sequentially.
Condensation polymers usually are formed by a stepwise intermolecular reaction of reactive functional groups of monomers
with multiple functional groups, also known as step-growth
polymerization. Addition polymers occur by propagation from
active growing chains where monomers are sequentially added
to one end of the chain, also known as chain-growth polymerization. Note that the classification by growth mechanism disregards the existence of by-products; therefore, step-growth
polymerization does not always produce by-product, and chaingrowth polymerization can yield by-products, depending on the
monomers involved.

Tg
Thermoset
Rubbery
State

Rubbery
Flow
Viscous Flow

Temperature (K)
• Figure 2-28 Effect of temperature on the stiffness of amorphous thermoplastic and thermoset polymers. Both materials exhibit glass-transition
and rubbery states. The structure of thermoplastic polymer turns rubbery,
and then viscous liquid, whereas thermoset polymer remains rubbery, and
then burns. An amorphous polymer takes on characteristic glassy-state
properties, such as brittleness, stiffness, and rigidity.

Tg

R
Methyl

CH 3

CH 2 CH 3

65 °C

n-Propyl

CH 2 CH 2 CH 3

38 °C

n-Butyl

CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3

33 °C

Ethyl

O

iso Propyl

O

iso-Butyl

m

Polymethacrylate esters

125 °C
120 °C

Phenyl

CH2

R

CH 3

sec-Butyl

CH 3
CH
CH 3
CH 3
C CH 3
C H3
CH 3
CH 2 C H
CH2 CH 3

95 °C

70 °C

62 °C

• Figure 2-29 Influence of pendant group on the glass-transition temperature of polymethacrylate esters.
R represents ester radicals.

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the stages of activation and free radical initiation and curing? Which
three activation processes are used for dental polymers?

Addition Polymerization (Chain-Growth Polymerization)
For addition polymerization to occur, monomers must contain
an unsaturated bond, which may exist in a double carbon-tocarbon bond or in a ring structure, as shown in Figure 2-30.
Carbon–carbon double-bond units are known as vinyl groups
and are most often exemplified in dentistry by methacrylate
monomers (H2C = CR–COOCH3). Ring-opening monomers are
represented by imine rings found in polyether impression materials (Chapter 13, Polyether) and by epoxy rings found in siloranebased restorative resins (Chapter 5, Low-Shrinkage Monomers).
An initiator is also needed to start chain-growth polymerization.
The initiator could be a free radical, that is, a substance containing
one unpaired electron but that carries no net charge for polymerizing vinyl base monomers (R•), or an ionic compound that carries
charges but maintains electrical neutrality as a catalyst for polymerization of monomers comprising rings. Stages of addition polymerization by free radicals are discussed in the following section, using
methyl methacrylates, a vinyl monomer, as the model materials.
The process occurs rapidly, almost instantaneously, and the reactions are exothermic, with considerable heat evolved.
Stages in Addition Polymerization of Vinyl Monomers
There are four stages in the addition polymerization chain reaction: induction, propagation, termination, and chain transfer.
Induction

The induction stage comprises two processes: generation of free
radicals (activation) and initiation of polymerization. Benzoyl

O
R CH

CH2

• Figure 2-30 Unsaturated functional groups for chain-growth polymerization: vinyl (left) and epoxy ring (right).

O

O

O

O

2
O

O

• Figure 2-31 Activation (heat or chemical) of benzoyl peroxide (BPO).
During activation, the bond between the two oxygen atoms indicated by
the hollow arrow is broken, and the electron pair is split between the two
fragments. The dot adjacent to the oxygen atom symbolizes the unpaired
electron of the free radical.

O
O

A

+ H2C

peroxide, which is commonly used in dental resins, can be activated
rapidly between 50 and 100 °C or by a second compound, such as
amine, to release free radicals (Figure 2-31). The third method is
light-activated initiation, which allows control of polymerization
with precision by varying light intensity. The latter has become the
preferred method of curing resin-based composites (Figure 5-5).
The stage of curing remains the same regardless of the method
of activation. Induction is the period during which initiator
molecules become energized and break down into free radicals,
followed by these radicals reacting with monomer molecules to
initiate chain growth (Figure 2-32). This period is greatly influenced by the purity of the monomer. Any impurities present that
are able to react with activated groups can increase the length of
this period by consuming the activated initiator molecules. However, the higher the temperature, the more rapid is the formation of
free radicals, and consequently, the shorter is the induction period.
When a free radical approaches a monomer with a high-electron-density double bond, an electron is extracted, and it pairs
with the R• electron to form a bond between the radical and the
monomer molecule, leaving the other electron of the double bond
unpaired. Thus the original free radical bonds to one side of the
monomer molecule and forms a new free radical site at the growing end of the chain (Figure 2-32).
Propagation

The resulting free radical–monomer complex then acts as a new
free radical center when it approaches another monomer to form
a dimer, which also becomes a free radical. This reactive species, in
turn, can add successively to a large number of methyl-methacrylate
molecules so that the polymerization process continues through the
propagation of the reactive center. Propagation reactions are further illustrated in Figure 2-33. Because little energy is required once
chain growth begins, the process continues with the evolution of
heat and leads to large polymer molecules within seconds.
Termination

H
C
H

R
C
H

39

CH3
O
O
CH3

Initiation

O
O

B

H
C
H

The chain reactions should continue until all the monomer has
been converted to polymer chains. However, there is a strong
tendency of growing radicals to react and cause termination of
chain growth. The probability increases as the monomer concentration decreases. The termination step can occur in two ways:
coupling and disproportionation. Coupling is by a direct combination of two free radical chain ends that deactivates the radicals
with the formation of a covalent bond (Figure 2-34). Disproportionation involves the transfer of a hydrogen atom from one growing chain to another (Figure 2-35). The free radical donates the
hydrogen and becomes unsaturated, while the other one receives
the hydrogen and becomes saturated. Therefore there are always
unsaturated functional groups remaining in resin-based composite restorations (Chapter 5, Degree of Conversion) and denture
bases (Chapter 11, Polymerization Cycle).

CH3
O

O
O
CH3

O

C

H
C
H

CH3
O

O
O
CH3

O

D

• Figure 2-32 Initiation of a methylmethacrylate molecule by free radical. As the unpaired electron of the
free radical approaches the methylmethacrylate molecule (A and B), one of the electrons in the double
bond is attracted to the free radical to form an electron pair and a covalent bond between the free radical
and the monomer molecule (C and D). When this occurs, the remaining unpaired electron makes the new
molecule a free radical (D).

H
C
H

CH3
O
O
CH3

40

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

m
CH3

CH3
O CH2
O

+ HC

CH3
CH3
CH2
O CH3
O Chain Growth
O
O
O
O
CH3
CH3

Propagation

2

O
O
CH3

O
O
CH3

CH3
O CH2
O

O
O
CH 3

CH3

CH3
CH2
O
O
CH3

CH2

m

O
O
CH3

• Figure 2-33 Propagation and chain growth. As the initiated molecule approaches other methylmethacrylate molecules, the free electron interacts with the double bond of the methylmethacrylate molecule and
incorporates the molecule to the growing chain, a new, longer free radical is formed.

CH3

CH3

O CH2

CH2

O +

O

O

O
CH3

O
CH3

m

CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
O
O
O
O
CH3
CH3

O
O

n

Termination by coupling
CH3
CH3 CH3
CH2
CH2
O
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
CH3 CH3

CH3
O CH2

O

O

O

CH2

O
CH3

m

O

n

• Figure 2-34 Termination occurs when two free radicals interact and are joined together by a covalent
bond (hollow arrow) but lose their reactivities.

CH3
O CH2
O

CH3
CH2

O
O
CH3

m

O +

O
CH3

CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
O
O
O
O
CH3
CH3

O
O

n

Termination by disproportionation
CH3
O CH2
O

CH3
CH
O +

O
O
CH3

H

m

O
CH3

CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
O
O
O
O
CH3
CH3

O
O

n

• Figure 2-35 Disproportionation occurs when two growing free radicals approach each other; one radical becomes an unsaturated end group (left) after it donates a hydrogen atom to the other free radical,
which becomes a saturated molecule (right). The end group that becomes saturated is the passivated
segment of the polymer chain.
Chain Transfer

The process of chain transfer involves transferring the reactivity
of a radical to another species, along with the termination of the
donating radical. The example in Figure 2-36 shows a monomer
being activated without the initiator (benzoyl peroxide, BPO).
Because the terminated chain gained an unsaturated functional
group, it could be reactivated by another chain transfer and continue to grow again.

Inhibition of Addition Polymerization
The polymerization reactions are not likely to result in a complete exhaustion of the monomer, nor do they always form polymers of high molecular weight. Impurities in the monomer often

inhibit such reactions. An impurity can react with the activated
initiator or with an activated growing chain and prevent further
growth. Although the presence of inhibitors markedly influences
the degree of polymerization, the mechanism has been used in
resin-based dental materials.
Addition of methyl ether of hydroquinone, a common inhibitor, in the amount of 0.006% or less, inhibits the spontaneous
polymerization of dental resins during storage. The inhibitor
neutralizes any free radical as it is formed before it initiates chain
growth. Therefore all hydroquinone should be eliminated before
polymerization by chain propagation can occur. Thus the inhibitor not only prevents premature polymerization during storage
but also provides adequate working time in the case of two-part
(self-cure) systems.

CH3
O CH2

CH2
O

O

O
CH3

m

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

CH3

CH3

O +

H2C
O
O
CH3

O
CH3

Chain Transfer
CH3

CH3

O CH2
O

O
O
CH3

CH

m

O +
O
CH3

CH3
H3C
O
O
CH3

• Figure 2-36 Chain transfer occurs when a free radical approaches a methylmethacrylate molecule and donates a hydrogen atom to
the methylmethacrylate molecule. This causes the free radical rearrangement to form a double bond and become unreactive, and the
methylmethacrylate monomer becomes a free radical without benzoyl
peroxide (BPO). The deactivated chain resulting from this exchange
can become an active growing chain by a chain transfer from another
free radical.

Oxygen reacts readily with the growing chains and results in
a radical of low reactivity that does not attract monomers and
thus inhibits chain growth. Oxygen inhibition mostly affects
the surface exposed to ambient air and produces a greasy film of
unpolymerized resin on newly placed sealants and resin-based
restorations. The oxygen-inhibited layer generally is unfavorable but can be beneficial in building up a light-cured composite restoration. When new composite is placed over the
oxygen-inhibited surface and light-cured, the once-inhibited
resin is now shielded from oxygen and exposed to fresh free
radicals activated by the light curing. The process promotes
bonding between layers of composites. Drawbacks with oxygen
inhibition are the higher release of poorly cured material to the
adjacent tissues, softer resin (composite) surfaces that are more
susceptible to wear and discoloration, and a weaker bond to
a tooth surface if the material shrinks away from the oxygeninhibited layer during curing.
A common clinical practice is to use a matrix material, which
helps to shape the resin and acts as a barrier to prevent contact
with oxygen during curing. Such a matrix strip prevents a sticky,
air-inhibited layer from forming on the surface.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What mechanisms are responsible for the inhibition of polymerization? What
are the benefits of inhibitors in dental resins? What role does O2 play as an
inhibitor?

Step-Growth Polymerization (Condensation
Polymerization)
The reactions that produce step-growth polymerization can progress by any chemical reaction that joins two or more molecules
to produce a simple nonmacromolecular structure. The primary
compounds react, often with the formation of by-products such
as water, alcohols, halogen acids, and ammonia. The formation
of these by-products is the reason step-growth polymerization
is often called condensation polymerization. This step-growth

41

mechanism is the one used exclusively in biological tissues to
produce proteins, carbohydrates, deoxyribonucleic acid, and
ribonucleic acid.
In step-growth polymerization, a linear chain of repeating mer
units is obtained by the stepwise intermolecular condensation or
the addition of the reactive groups in which bifunctional or trifunctional monomers are all simultaneously active, as opposed to
the activation of one monomer at a time of a growing chain in
chain-growth addition polymerization. There are two approaches
to form condensation polymers: one having both reactive functional groups in one molecule and the other having two types of
difunctional monomers. The following example is for the polymerization of one type of diol.
HO  (silicone)  OH  nHO  (silicone)  OH 
H  (O  silicone) n+1  OH  nH2 O.
(1)
Very often a catalyst is needed to accelerate the reaction, and
the resultant molecular weight increases as the duration of the
reaction increases. If a monofunctional impurity is present, the
reaction will limit the growth of the polymer chain by rendering
a chain end inactive.
There are two more examples related to stepwise polymerization in Chapter 13. In one, water is removed in the process of
joining one type of monomer (trimercaptan) to form a polysulfide rubber with an oxidizing agent (Figure 13-2); in the other
case, ethanol is removed in the process of joining siloxane molecules to form silicone rubber involving two types of monomers
(Figure 13-3).
The formation of polymers by step growth is comparatively
slow because the reaction proceeds in a stepwise fashion from
monomer to dimer to trimer, and so forth, until large polymer
molecules containing many mer units are eventually formed.
Such a polymerization process tends to stop when the chains have
grown to certain sizes that are less mobile and with few functional
groups left to react.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the practical benefits of using copolymer resins for dental
applications?

Copolymerization
Resin-based materials used in dentistry that require polymerization at chairside or in the laboratory usually comprise more than
one type of monomer. In many of the polymerization reactions
described previously, the macromolecule is formed by the polymerization of a single type of structural unit. However, two or more
chemically different monomers, each with some desirable property, can be combined to yield specific physical properties of a
polymer. As defined earlier, the polymer formed is a copolymer,
and the process of formation is known as copolymerization.

Composite Materials
A composite is a material made of two or more constituent components with significantly different physical or chemical properties that, when combined, produce a material with characteristics
different from the individual components. Most importantly, the
combination is designed to achieve specific functional properties.
The individual components remain separate and distinct within

42

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

the finished structure, differentiating composites from mixtures
and solid solutions. In modern materials engineering, composites
usually consist of one or more discontinuous phases embedded
within a continuous phase.

Microstructure of Composite
The discontinuous phase is usually harder and stronger than
the continuous phase and is called the reinforcement or reinforcing material, whereas the continuous phase is named the matrix
or binder. Each class of materials discussed so far can be either
the matrix or the reinforcement phase of a composite, or both
phases of the composite. The reinforcement phase, which is discontinuous, can be in the form of particles, short fibers in random
directions, unidirectional long fibers, woven fabrics, laminates, or
honeycomb. The reinforcement phase of the composite materials
used in dentistry is mostly glass or ceramic particles and some
short fibers. Often the term filler is used to represent the reinforcement phase of the particles and short fibers.

Benefit of Composite Structure
The most cited benefits of adding harder, stronger, or tougher fillers to a matrix are the improvement in the stiffness, strength, or
toughness of the resulting materials. By the rule of mixtures, the
final properties of the material will be between those of the two
constituent materials. Strength enhancement alone would not necessarily satisfy the clinician’s need at chairside. Clinicians need to
prepare materials at chairside, adapt them to the tooth structure,
shape them while they are still soft, and then allow the material
to set to the hardened stage capable of withstanding the occlusal
load (Chapter 1, Challenges of Dental Materials in the Oral Cavity). The most noted composite used in modern dentistry is resinbased composite made of a polymeric resin matrix embedded with
glass or ceramic particles (Chapter 5, History of Composites). The
matrix phase alone can be fluid enough to adapt to tooth surfaces
and set to a solid. The addition of filler particles to the matrix can
increase the viscosity of the mixture, providing the bulk for shaping the matrix phase and rendering much-needed strength. Filler
particles, on their own, would have no ability to form a firm solid,
but with the help of the matrix phase, fillers can form a useful solid
structure. In dentistry, the term composite has been used exclusively
for resin-based composite materials.

Composite Materials Used in Dentistry
In addition to resin-based composites, the following chapters show
that most dental materials, if examined in detail, are composed of
dissimilar subunits as in composites. For example, aqueous dental
cements are the result of reactive filler particles mixed with an acid
solution. The product of reaction becomes a continuous phase, and
unreacted particulates are the discontinuous phase (Chapter 7, History of Dental Cements). Dental amalgam is the result of the partial
dissolution of alloy particles in mercury, where new mercury-rich
phases emerge as the matrix holding the unreacted portion of the
alloy particles together (Chapter 8, Amalgamation). Multiphase
metal alloy can have precipitates dispersed in the microstructure. Keep in mind that metal alloys are not treated as composites, but they do possess structures of a composite nature. Dental
porcelain consists of a glassy matrix and a ceramic filler particle
phase for strengthening purposes (Chapter 10, Crystalline Particle
Strengthening). Denture-base resins incorporate polymer beads in

the monomer to make the mixture easily workable for processing.
Those beads dissolve partially, and the remaining portion is dispersed within the polymerized matrix (Chapter 11, Acrylic Resins).
Impression materials have a wide range of filler contents facilitating
the specific requirements of impression making (Chapter 13, Chemistry of Elastomeric Impression Materials). Various allotropic forms
of silica (SiO2) are incorporated in investment material for metal
casting to induce fracture resistance at elevated temperatures and
provide thermal expansion of the mold during heating to compensate for metal casting shrinkage (Chapter 14, Investment Materials).
For abrasive instruments, hard abrasive grits use resin (or rubber),
metal, and glass (or ceramic) as the binder to make instruments
for various surface-reduction and finishing processes (Chapter 16,
Design of Abrasive Instruments). Not all composite materials mentioned are made with strengthening in mind but, rather, to fulfill
other goals, such as the ability to manipulate the material. Nonetheless, adjusting the filler phase to improve the strength of the final
material has been done in some of those materials.

Factors Influencing Properties of Composites
The properties of particle-filled resin composites are influenced by
three major factors: component properties, filler content by volume, and interfacial interaction between filler and matrix. The
matrix phase is characterized by the stiffness and the fillers by particle size, size distribution, specific surface area, and particle shape.
The strength of the composite increases with the filler-volume fraction, up to a limit. Both factors are discussed in Chapter 5, Composition and Function. Interfacial interaction can considerably affect
properties. For the filler in the resin composite to be effective, a
good bonding between the filler and the matrix is essential to enable
the matrix to transfer the load to the filler to resist fracture. This
means that the filler becomes an integral part of the matrix phase.
Recall from the section on types of bonds that both primary
and secondary bonds hold materials together. These bonds occur
within the same material; for example, metallic bonds form within
metals after melting of metal components and solidification.
Ceramic powders are packed together and sintered into a solid
object. Solid polymer blends can be made by melting two thermoplastics together and solidifying. How do the fillers bond to the
matrix? In dental amalgam, there is a chemical reaction between
the mercury and metal alloys, where the bonding between filler and
matrix is likely the primary bond. It is the same with the aqueousbased dental cements.
For the other materials, the matrix is usually a resinous fluid
phase before solidifying, and there is often no chemical reaction between the two components. There must be some sort of
interaction between the liquid and the solid keeping them together
after the liquid phase solidifies. In the next section, the interactions between the solid surface and the liquid phase in holding
these materials together are examined.

Adhesion and Bonding
So far, we have been exploring the attraction between atoms and
molecules in the formulation of metals, ceramics, polymers, and
composites. It is the formulation of composites that tests our understanding of bonding. Although we do not expect to observe a similar
attraction between two nonmagnetized solid objects, we do notice
that two solids can adhere to each other with or without the help of
a third substance or device. As examples, an artificial denture stays
attached to the soft tissue when saliva is present, plaque adherence to

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

tooth structure facilitates the formation of calculus, and a transmucosal abutment is fixed to the implant root by a screw (Figure 2-37).
The first two examples involve bonding at the molecular scale, and
the last one, the implant root, is first retained by mechanical means,
followed by osseointegration (Chapter 12, Implant Attachment
Mechanism). Some dental materials are bonded to the hard tissue to
replace the missing part of the tooth structure and restore its functions. Therefore an understanding of the fundamental principles
associated with bonding is important to the dentist.
When the molecules of one substrate adhere or are attracted to
molecules of the other substrate, the force of attraction is called
adhesion when unlike molecules are attracted, and it is called
cohesion when the molecules involved are of the same kind. The
material that is used to cause adhesion or bonding is known as
the adhesive, and the material to which the adhesive is applied
is called the adherend. In a broad sense, bonding is simply a

surface-attachment process, which is usually qualified by specifying the type of intermolecular attraction that may exist between
the adhesive and the adherend. The application of these concepts
is discussed in Chapter 6, Mechanisms of Adhesion.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is the potential energy of the atoms on the surface higher than those
within the bulk of the material?

Surface, Surface Energy, and Surface Tension
A surface is defined as the outermost atomic or molecular layer of a
material. Consider the space lattice of a solid shown in Figure 2-38, A.
Inside the lattice, all the atoms are equally attracted to each other.
The interatomic attraction for interior atom “1” has a balanced

Buccal
mucosa

Surface
tension

A

B
C
• Figure 2-37 Examples of solid adhering to solid in dentistry. A, Retention of denture base; saliva fills
in the space between the denture and soft tissue, providing retention through capillary attraction (Figure
2-38). The space between the denture and the soft tissue is exaggerated to show the capillary attraction.
B, Plaque formation on the enamel surface, which converts to calculus by calcification. C, The implant
root is first retained by the bone mechanically, followed by osseointegration for long-term implant stability.
(Courtesy Dr. Inchan Ko.)
Surface atom or
molecule (2)
Interior atom or
molecule (1)
2

A

43

1

B
• Figure 2-38 Comparison of atom (or molecule) under the surface with atom (or molecule) on the surface. Each sphere represents an atom or a molecule. A, As a solid, a bond balance exists around the
interior atom (1), and the exposed atom (2) on the surface is free to develop bonds to atoms or molecules
approaching the surface. B, As a liquid, the interior molecule (1) is in equilibrium with neighboring molecules, whereas molecule (2) is in equilibrium with molecules along the surface but experiences a pulling
force to the interior of the liquid mass.

44

PA RT I

TABLE 2-3

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Surface Energy of Selected Materials

Solids

Surface Energy (mJ/m2)

Liquids

Enamel1

92

Water5

Dentin

1

87

2

20

Teflon

Gold alloy

3

51–54

3

Surface Energy (mJ/m2)
72.8 @25°C
5

486 @25°C

Mercury
6

53 @37°C

Saliva

7

Dentin bonding agent

34–55

48

Ni-Cr

3

Commercial pure titanium
4

Acrylic denture resins

50
46–54

Note: Depending on the measuring methods and the materials used, the values obtained are likely to be different among studies. The table is intended to give readers a general idea of surface energies
of selected materials.
1
Weerkamp AH, Uyen HM, Busscher HJ: Effect of zeta potential and surface energy on bacterial adhesion to uncoated and saliva-coated human enamel and dentin. J Dent Res 67:1483–1487, 1988.
2
Jań czuk B, Białopiotrowicz T, Zdziennicka A: Some remarks on the components of the liquid surface free energy. J Colloid Interf Sci 211:96–103, 1999.
3
Sardin S, Morrier JJ, Benay G, Barsotti O: In vitro streptococcal adherence on prosthetic and implant materials. Interactions with physicochemical surface properties. J Oral Rehab 31:140–148, 2004
4
Sipahi C, Anil N, Bayramli E: The effect of acquired salivary pellicle on the surface free energy and wettability of different denture base materials. J Dent 29:197–204, 2001.
5
Haynes WM, Lide DR, editors: Handbook of chemistry and physics, ed 91, Boca Raton, FL, 2011, CRC Press, pp 6–127.
6
Glantz PO: The surface tension of saliva. Odontol Rev 21:119–127, 1970.
7
Gonçalves M, Pécora JD, Vinha D, Silva RS: Surface tension of different dentin bonding resin systems. Braz Dent J 8:43–47, 1997.

array of neighbors surrounding it, and the potential energy is
at a minimum. At the surface of the lattice, surface atom “2” is
not equally attracted in all directions, and its potential energy is
greater. This potential energy can be demonstrated by the behavior
of a small drop of water placed on a clean glass slide. The water
droplet spreads out and remains stationary when the glass slide is
tilted or turned upside down. This means that the water molecules
are attracted to the glass surface. This phenomenon of attraction
can be explained by the potential energy discussed in Figure 2-2.
The potential energy present is known as surface energy with the
unit of mJ/m2. Surface energy is also treated as the work required
to generate a new surface.
In the case of a liquid, the molecules, which are shown as
spheres in Figure 2-38, B, on the surface are pulled inward by the
imbalanced forces generated by the unequal attraction on the surface. One good example is falling raindrops taking spherical shapes,
which have the smallest surface area per volume of all known
shapes. The sphere arrangement allows more molecules surrounded
by their fellows (molecule “2” in Figure 2-38, B), while the molecules on the surface are constantly under tension. The reality is that
the cohesive attraction between liquid molecules on the surface is
the force keeping the surface to a minimum. This force is known
as surface tension, which is often expressed as an amount of force
exerted uniformly on a line of molecules of unit length along the
surface. The most common unit is mN/m (millinewton per meter).
The terms surface energy and surface tension are often used
interchangeably because the values of the two parameters are the
same. Nonetheless, one should be aware that surface tension is
used to define fluid surfaces, whereas surface energy is often used
to define solid surfaces but is also applicable for liquids. Generally,
the greater the cohesive force between atoms and molecules, the
greater the surface energy of the surface. Table 2-3 lists the surface
energy of selected solids and liquids.
Surfaces with a high surface energy are attractive to molecules
of lower surface energy, such as hydrocarbons. Molecules in the
air may be attracted to and become adsorbed on the material surface. Initially, the attraction between them is secondary bonding

(van der Waals force). As the distance between the molecules
from the air and the surface diminishes, primary bonding may
occur. Silver, platinum, and gold adsorb oxygen readily. Neither
gold nor platinum forms stable oxides at room temperature;
therefore the bond between oxygen and metals (gold and platinum) remains secondary. In the case of silver, silver oxide may
form as oxygen becomes bonded to silver by covalent bonding.
This process is called chemisorption and is limited to the monolayer of oxide present on the surface. Both phenomena constitute
an adhesion process, where oxygen is the adhesive and metals are
the adherents. Keep in mind that after interaction with oxygen,
these surfaces are not pure metallic surfaces anymore in terms of
surface bonding.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What conditions are necessary to achieve the strongest level of bonding?

Wetting
When two impurity-free glass slides are placed one on top of
another and pressed together, they exhibit no tendency to adhere.
Regardless of how smooth these glass surfaces may appear to be,
they are likely to be rough on an atomic or molecular scale. Consequently, when they are placed in apposition, only the “hills” or
high spots are in contact. Even if primary or secondary bonding
occurs at these points of contact, these areas usually constitute
only an insignificant portion of the total surface, and no perceptible adhesion takes place. In addition, no attraction is expected
when the surface molecules of the attracting substances are separated by distances greater than 0.7 nm.
The examples of adhesives bonding to solid surfaces given earlier involved either gas or liquid. It is obvious that gas and liquid
can adapt to a solid surface by flowing into surface irregularities
to provide contact over a greater part of the surface of the solid.
When a drop of water is introduced between two glass slides before
they are pressed together, considerable difficulty is encountered

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

45

P

d

P=

2 L cos
d

P

• Figure 2-39 Two glass plates and water film. The liquid (water) between the two plates spreads because of good wetting. The attraction between the water molecule and glass surface is greater than the
cohesive force between water molecules. Therefore, as water molecules spread, they also pull the two
glass slides closer. Small arrows show the vector of surface tension, and broad arrows show the force that
pulls the slides closer. The surface tension of water is about 72.8 mN/m. For a space of 1 μm, the stress
acting on the slide will be 140 kN/m2 (0.14 MPa). You will learn in Chapter 4 that the value is relatively low.
Therefore, if the glass slides cannot be separated by pure tension, it is likely that the water film (d) is only
nanometers in thickness.

in pulling the two slides apart (Figure 2-39). This is a result of
the capillary action from intermolecular attractive forces between
water and the glass plates.
To produce adhesion on any targeted surface, the liquid (adhesive) must spread and flow easily over the entire surface and attract
to the solid. This characteristic is known as wetting. If the liquid
beads up on the surface of the adherend, adhesion between the liquid and the adherend will be negligible or nonexistent. The ability
to wet the substrate is the dominating contributor to the adhesive
bond when the adhesive sets from liquid to solid.
The ability of an adhesive to wet the surface of the adherend
is influenced by several factors. The cleanliness of the surface is of
importance. Impurities on the solid surface often yield a surface
of lower energy than the clean surface and prevent wetting by the
adhesive, such as epoxy glue. A surface’s surface energy can be so
low, such as that of dental wax or Teflon, that it cannot be wet satisfactorily by most dental adhesives. Impurity-free metal surfaces,
on the other hand, because of their high surface energy, interact
vigorously with liquid adhesives.
In general, the comparatively low surface energies of organic
and inorganic liquids permit them to spread freely on solids of
high surface energy. This means the attraction between a liquid
and a solid surface is greater than the cohesive forces of the liquids.
This is a prerequisite of good wetting and strong adhesive joints.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does wetting increase (higher wettability) if the adhesive attraction at
the liquid/solid interface is greater than the cohesive attraction of the liquid
molecules?

Contact Angle of Wetting
How can we tell if a liquid wets a solid satisfactorily for bonding,
especially when the surface to be bonded is covered by that very
liquid? When we place one drop of water each on a clean glass
slide, an acrylic plate, and a sheet of Teflon, we observe that the
water drop spreads to the edge of the glass slide and to a lesser
extent on the acrylic plate but appears to bead up on the Teflon
surface. If we observe at the level of the solid substrate, we will see
the symmetrical profile of the former water drop resting on a flat
surface (Figure 2-40). Both ends of the profile depict where three
phases—vapor (air), liquid (water), and solid (glass, acrylic, or Teflon)—converge. We can draw a tangent relative to the curvature

of the liquid profile from the vapor/liquid interface. The tangent
line and the solid surface constitute an angle that defines the shape
of the liquid; this is called the contact angle.
If the force of attraction between molecules of the adhesive and
molecules of the substrate is stronger than the cohesive attraction
(surface tension) between the molecules of the adhesive, the liquid
adhesive will spread much more broadly over the solid surface and
result in a smaller contact angle (Figure 2-40, A). Thus a small
contact angle indicates that the adhesive forces at the interface
are stronger than the cohesive forces holding the molecules of the
adhesive together. If the adhesive beads up (Figure 2-40, C), the
force of adhesion is weaker than the cohesive force of the adhesive. Because the tendency for the liquid to spread increases as the
contact angle decreases, the contact angle is a useful indicator of
spreadability or wettability (Figure 2-40, D). Complete wetting
occurs at a contact angle of 0°, and no wetting occurs at an angle
of 180°. Thus the smaller the contact angles between an adhesive
and an adherend, the better the ability of the adhesive to flow into
and fill in irregularities within the surface of the adherend. The
fluidity of the adhesive influences the extent to which these voids
or irregularities are filled.
If oil drops or liquids other than water have been used instead,
the observed contact angle will be different. Therefore it is important to know the identity of the liquid that has been used to determine the contact angles. If none is identified in the literature, it is
likely that distilled water has been used.
The profile of the liquid on a flat surface shows that there are
three distinct interfaces, vapor/liquid, liquid/solid, and solid/vapor,
and each interface is characterized by an interfacial energy, γVL, γLS,
and γSV, respectively. At equilibrium, the interfacial energies among
the three phases along x-axis should follow Young’s equation,
shown in Figure 2-40, D. The equation shows that there are two
routes of decreasing contact angle; one is to have a high-surfaceenergy solid surface, and the other is to use a low-surface-tension
liquid. It is important to point out that Young’s equation shown in
Figure 2-40 assumes a perfectly flat surface at the molecular level,
and any surface roughness and impurities can cause a deviation in
the values of contact angle calculated by Young’s equation.

CRITICAL QUESTION
You observe a lack of soft or hard tissue details in a gypsum model you have
made from a hydrophobic impression material. What steps can be taken to
eliminate this problem when you are using this impression material in the future?

46

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Acrylic sheet
0°

= 75°

A

= 110°

B

C
LV

Vapor

Liquid
SV

SL

0

Solid
LV cos

SV =

SL +

LV cos

D
• Figure 2-40 Contact angles of distilled water on three surfaces and relationship among interfacial energy. A, Water spreads freely on a flame-cleaned glass slide (good wetting). The profile depicted here is
considered to have a 0° contact angle. B, Water on an acrylic surface. C, Water on a Teflon surface (poor
wetting). D, Relationships between the interfacial energies at vapor/liquid (γVL), liquid/solid (γLS), and solid/
vapor (γSV) interfaces with respect to contact angle at equilibrium; the relationship is also known as Young’s
equation.

Issues of wetting associated with individual material occur
daily in clinical dentistry and are discussed in later chapters.
Here is one example of interest. When gypsum products discussed in Chapter 13 are mixed with water to pour dental models
on various types of impressions, wetting must occur between
gypsum and the impression to ensure good surface quality of the
gypsum model. The basic ingredient of the most popular silicone-based elastomeric impression material today is hydrophobic because a contact angle of greater than 90° is observed when
an aqueous medium is poured into this elastomeric mold. To
improve the wettability of the set impression material by a gypsum–water mixture, the operator usually sprays a surfactant (also
called debubblizer) on the impression before pouring. The most
direct approach by the manufacturer is to incorporate a wetting
agent (also known as a surfactant) in the impression material
during the manufacturing process (Chapter 13, Wettability of
Impression Materials and Hydrophilization of PVS). The wetting agent migrates to the solid surface and accommodates surface wetting by the aqueous gypsum-forming mixture. One may
think that surfactant increases the surface energy of the impression material. The fact is just the opposite. The surfactant on the
solid surface dissolves in the water of the gypsum product that
reduces the cohesive attraction between water molecules and,
thus, lowers the contact angle of the gypsum slurry on the
impression surface. Table 2-4 lists contact angles of probing liquids on selected materials.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Micromechanical bonding of resin sealant to tooth enamel is usually quite
effective in preventing pit and fissure areas from tooth decay. However,
many factors can reduce the bonding effectiveness, resulting in partial
or total loss of the sealant. Which of these factors are possible causes of
debonding?

Mechanical Interlocking
Strong attachment of one substance to another can also be accomplished by mechanical means rather than by molecular attraction. Such structural retention may be crude, as evidenced by
some nondental applications involving the use of screws, bolts,
or undercuts. Similar procedures that involve more subtle mechanisms are also used in restorative dentistry and are called mechanical interlocking or bonding.
Before resin-based adhesives were introduced to dentistry, various types of pastes or slightly viscous materials, like zinc phosphate
cement (Chapter 7, Zinc Phosphate Cement), were being used to
retain cast gold alloy crowns or base metal endodontic posts and
cores. These materials do not form a strong molecular attraction
to the substrate surface, but they provide the needed retention to
hold the prostheses in place. In this scenario, the luting medium
penetrates irregularities that exist on the intaglio of the casting
and those that are present on the adjoining tooth structure. Upon
hardening, the numerous cementing material projections embedded in the adherend surface provide the anchorage for mechanical
retention. This process is often called micromechanical bonding.
Good wetting is necessary to ensure penetration.
The early versions of resin-based filling materials did not form
a strong attraction to tooth structure, and consequently, leakage adjacent to the restoration occurred. Such leakage patterns
contribute to marginal stain, secondary caries, and irritation of
the pulp. This drawback was brought under control only when
acid etching of enamel had been accepted as a routine procedure.
Before insertion of the resin, the enamel of the adjoining tooth
structure is exposed to phosphoric acid for a short period, and
then rinsed to remove any residual acid. The acid produces minute
irregularities on the enamel surface, into which the resin flows
when it is placed into the tooth preparation. On hardening, these
resin projections provide improved mechanical retention of the

CHAPTER 2

TABLE 2-4

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

47

Contact Angles of Probing Liquids on Solid Surfaces

Solid

Probing Liquid

Amalgam1

Mercury

2

Contact Angle
(degree)
145

Water

77

Acrylic denture resins

Water

75

Dental ceramic (feldspathic
core)3

Water

71

Dental ceramic (feldspathic
core)3

Bonding resin

Amalgam

2

2

Teflon

4

Commercial pure titanium

54

Water

110

Water

54

Contact Angle
(degree)

Impression Materials

Probing Liquid

Polyether5

Water

30–44

Polysulfide

Gypsum solution
(0.2 gm/mL)

76–85

Addition silicone5

Water

34–105

Addition silicone
(hydrophilic)5

Water

20–78

Condensation silicone5

Water

82–103

6

Note: Depending on the measuring methods and the materials used, the values obtained are likely to be different among studies. The table is intended to give readers a general idea of the contact angles
of various dental materials.
1
Baran G, O’Brien WJ: Wetting of amalgam alloys by mercury. JADA 94:898–900, 1977.
2
O’Brien WJ: Capillary penetration of liquids between dissimilar solids. PhD Dissertation, University of Michigan, 1967.
3
Oh W, Shen C, Alegre B, Anusavice KJ: Wetting characteristic of ceramic to water and adhesive resin. J Prosthet Dent 88:616–621, 2002.
4
Ponsonnet L, Reybier K, Jaffrezic N, et al: Relationship between surface properties (roughness, wettability) of titanium and titanium alloys and cell behavior. Mat Sci Eng C 23:551–556, 2003.
5
Cullen DR, Mikesell JW, Sandik JL: Wettability of elastomeric impression materials and voids in gypsum casts. J Prosthet Dent 66:261–265, 1991.
6
Pratten DH, Craig RG: Wettability of a hydrophilic addition silicone impression material. J Prosthet Dent 61:197–201, 1989.

Adhesive

Air
Solid

• Figure 2-41 Air pockets form in a surface irregularity even when the contact angle of the adhesive is
low. These voids contribute to the propagation of adhesive failure by concentration of stresses.

restoration, thereby reducing the possibility of interfacial leakage.
In fact, the etching procedure cleans the enamel surface and creates more surface area, facilitating greater wettability of the enamel
by the adhesive and, subsequently, a stronger bond.
It is important to note that whereas surface imperfections provide sites for mechanical bonding, there are areas that adhesives
may not fill because of trapped air pockets (Figure 2-41). When
the adhesive interfacial region is subjected to thermal changes and
mechanical stresses, stress concentrations develop around these
voids. The stress may become so great that it initiates a separation in
the adhesive bond adjacent to the void. This crack may propagate
from one void to the next, and the joint may separate under stress.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the main challenges involved in bonding to tooth structure?

Bonding to Tooth Structure
Adhesive bonding to tooth structure and other dental materials
has become a major component of restorative dentistry. So far,
we have used an ideal adherend that has a clean surface with uniform composition and certain surface irregularities in our discussion of bonding. Tooth structure does not fall into that category.
Tooth composition is heterogeneous. Both organic and inorganic

components are present in different amounts in dentin compared
with enamel. A material that can adhere to the organic components
may not adhere to the inorganic components, and an adhesive that
bonds to enamel may not adhere to dentin to the same extent.
The instruments used to prepare the tooth for bonding leave
a rough surface and debris, which promote air entrapment at the
interface. Such prepared surfaces are routinely treated with appropriate agents to remove the debris. New debris must be removed
after each additional procedure, in addition to dealing with saliva
contamination. Furthermore, there is a fluid exchange through certain components of the tooth. The dental adhesive must compete
with water for wetting the tooth surface by displacing or incorporating it. Then, too, the adhesive must sustain long-term adhesion
to the tooth structure in an aqueous environment. Attempts are
being made to use more hydrophilic resins that are not as sensitive
to the presence of moisture as materials currently in use. To further enhance adhesive bonding to tooth structure or other dental
materials, the incorporation of functional groups that have the
potential of chemically reacting with the bonding substrate is also
being sought. Perhaps there will be no need for mechanical retention in the cavity preparation in the future. Keeping the surface
free of contamination remains a vital part of bonding procedures.
These subjects are discussed in detail in Chapter 6, Mechanisms of
Adhesion and Acid-Etch Technique, which deals with materials
for bonding applications.

48

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Selected Readings
Abbaschian R, Abbaschian L, Reed-Hill RE: Physical Metallurgy Principles, ed 4, Stamford CT, 2009, Cengage Learning.
An excellent textbook on physical metallurgy that discusses the solidification of metals and alloys and the formation of equiaxed polycrystalline and dendritic microstructures.
Brantley WA, Cai Z, Carr AB, et al: Metallurgical structures of as-cast
and heat-treated high-palladium dental alloys, Cells Mater 3:103–114,
1993.
High-palladium alloys with equiaxed polycrystalline and dendritic
microstructures are described. Careful study of the micrographs is
useful for comparing the potential structural integrity and some properties of these alloys.
Buonocore MG: The Use of Adhesives in Dentistry, Springfield, IL, 1975,
Charles C Thomas.
The problems associated with dental adhesives are nicely illustrated. It
is of interest that many of the procedures using bonding technology
discussed in this text have become commonplace.
Cowie JMG, Arrighi V: Polymers: Chemistry and Physics of Modern Materials, ed 3, Boca Raton, FL, 2007, CRC Press.
Emphasizes structure/property relationships in polymers. Written for
nonchemists who require a brief, readable introduction to polymer
chemistry.

Good RJ: Contact angle, wetting, and adhesion: a critical review, J Adhes
Sci Technol 6:1269–1302, 1992.
An excellent review on the fundamentals of contact angle and wetting
and their relationship to adhesion.
Habib E, Wang R, Wang Y, et al: Inorganic fillers for dental resin composites: Present and future, ACS Biomater Sci Eng 2:1–11, 2016.
Pampuch R: An Introduction to Ceramics. Lecture Notes in Chemistry,
Vol. 86, 2014, Springer International Publishing.
Rueggeberg FA: From vulcanite to vinyl, a history of resins in restorative
dentistry, J Prosthet Dent 87:364–379, 2002.
A comprehensive review of the introduction and evolution of polymeric materials in modern dentistry.
Söderholm K-JM: Coatings in dentistry—A review of some basic principles, Coatings 2:138–159, 2012.
This paper reviews fundamental principles of surface properties/
adhesives since these topics form the foundation for most coating
procedures used in dentistry.
Van Vlack LH: Elements of Materials Science and Engineering, ed 6, Reading, MA, 1989, Addison-Wesley.
An excellent primer on materials science. Chapter 5 describes phase
diagrams, and Chapters 8 and 9 present deformation and strengthening mechanisms for alloys.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Reading (Web Version)
Structure of Matter
Callister WD, Jr, Rethwisch DG: Materials Science and Engineering: An
Introduction, ed 8, Hoboken, NJ, 2010, John Wiley & Sons.
An excellent text on materials science for a more in-depth coverage of
materials structure and properties.
Gordon JE: The New Science of Strong Materials, or Why You Don’t Fall
Through the Floor? ed 2, Princeton, NJ, 1984, Princeton University Press.
A general discussion of the strength of materials from a fundamental
base. The sections on biological structural materials, timber, cellulose,
teeth, and bone are particularly interesting.
Van Vlack LH: Elements of Materials Science and Engineering, ed 6,
Reading, MA, 1989, Addison-Wesley.
An excellent primer on materials science. Chapter 5 describes phase
diagrams, and Chapters 8 and 9 present deformation and strengthening mechanisms for alloys.
Metal
Abbaschian R, Abbaschian L, Reed-Hill RE: Physical Metallurgy Principles, ed 4, Stamford, CT, 2009, Cengage Learning.
An excellent textbook on physical metallurgy that discusses the solidification of metals and alloys and the formation of equiaxed polycrystalline and dendritic microstructures.
Brantley WA, Cai Z, Carr AB, et al: Metallurgical structures of as-cast
and heat-treated high-palladium dental alloys, Cells Mater 3:103–114,
1993.
High-palladium alloys with equiaxed polycrystalline and dendritic
microstructures are described. Careful study of the micrographs is
useful for comparing the potential structural integrity and some properties of these alloys.
Brantley WA, Cai Z, Vermilyea SG, et al: Effects of solidification
conditions and heat treatment on the microstructure and Vickers hardness of Pd-Cu-Ga dental alloys, Cells Mater 6:127–135,
1996.
This article shows that the incidence of hot tears in a high-palladium
alloy with a dendritic as-cast microstructure is much greater when the
alloy is quenched rather than bench-cooled. The path of crack propagation is between adjacent interdendritic regions.
Carr AB, Cai Z, Brantley WA, et al: New high-palladium casting alloys:
Part 2. Effects of heat treatment and burnout temperature, Int J
Prosthodont 6:233–241, 1993.
This article discusses the formation of hot tears in a high-palladium
alloy with a dendritic as-cast microstructure and the potential role of
burnout temperature on their formation.
Cullity BD: Principles of X-Ray Diffraction, ed 2, Reading, MA, 1978,
Addison-Wesley.
A description of x-ray diffraction techniques used to determine crystal
structures of metallic materials. Chapter 13 in this book summarizes
the ordered structures in gold-copper alloys.
Flinn R, Trojan P: Engineering Materials and Their Applications, ed 3, Boston, MA, 1986, Houghton Mifflin, pp 116–169.
A discussion of equilibrium [phase diagram] and nonequilibrium conditions in systems as related to properties. There are excellent photographs and examples.
Guo WH, Brantley WA, Li D, et al: Annealing study of palladium-silver
dental alloys: Vickers hardness measurements and SEM microstructural observations, J Mater Sci Mater Med 18:111–118, 2007.
Photomicrographs of representative as-cast and heat-treated Pd-Ag
alloys and a detailed description of the hardness changes caused by
heat treatment.
Metals Handbook, desk edition. Metals Park, OH 1992, American Society
of Metals.
A comprehensive reference book on the structure, properties, and processing of metals. This book also describes testing methods for metals
and provides an excellent review of fractographic analysis procedures
for the study of fractured metals.

Nielsen JP, Tuccillo JJ: Grain size in cast gold alloys, J Dent Res 45:964–
969, 1966.
Although there may be uncertainty about the suggested homogeneous
nucleation mechanism, this is the classic reference on grain refinement
in dental gold alloys.
Nitta SV, Clark WAT, Brantley WA, et al: TEM analysis of tweed structure
in high-palladium dental alloys. J Mater Sci Mater Med 10:513–517,
1999.
The characteristic submicron tweed structure and microtwins in these
alloys are described.
Porter DA, Easterling KE: Phase Transformations in Metals and Alloys,
ed 2, London, 1992, Chapman & Hall.
This undergraduate engineering textbook describes phase transformations and the structure and properties of interfaces.
Smith DL, Burnett AP, Brooks MS, Anthony DH: Iron-platinum hardening in casting golds for use with porcelain, J Dent Res 49:283–288,
1970.
The hardening mechanism appears to be the transformation between
FePt3 and FePt.
Uzuka T, Kanzawa Y, Yasuda K: Determination of the AuCu superlative formation region in gold-copper-silver ternary system, J Dent Res
60:883–889, 1981.
A classic article that presents the solid-state transformations in this
important ternary alloy system.
Wu Q, Brantley WA, Mitchell JC, et al: Heat-treatment behavior of highpalladium dental alloys, Cells Mater 7:161–174, 1997.
Evidence is presented for the contribution of a very hard phase to the
strengthening of some high-palladium alloys, and the formation of
discontinuous precipitates is described.
Yasuda K, Ohta M: Difference in age-hardening mechanism in dental
gold alloys, J Dent Res 61:473–479, 1982.
A comprehensive description of the ordered structures and other
phases that provide age hardening of ternary gold-silver-copper alloys.
Yasuda K, van Tendeloo G, Van Landuyt J, et al: High-resolution electron
microscopic study of age-hardening in a commercial dental gold alloy,
J Dent Res 65:1179–1185, 1986.
This article shows the unique ability of high-resolution transmission
electron microscopy to reveal the complex ordered structures in a
commercial dental gold casting alloy.
Ceramic
Kelly JR: Dental ceramics: What is this stuff anyway? J Am Dent Assoc
139:4S–7S, 2008.
Pampuch R: An Introduction to Ceramics. Lecture Notes in Chemistry, Vol 86, 2014, Springer International Publishing.
Polymer
Cowie JMG, Arrighi V: Polymers: Chemistry and Physics of Modern
Materials, ed 3, Boca Raton, FL, 2007, CRC Press.
Emphasizes structure/property relationships in polymers. Written for
nonchemists who require a brief, readable introduction to polymer
chemistry.
Morrison RT, Boyd RN: Organic Chemistry, ed 6, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
2007, Prentice Hall.
A classic text that provides a fundamental understanding of mechanisms and molecular structure. Concisely written with emphasis on
key issues that build step by step to make difficult concepts easier to
understand.
Rueggeberg FA: From vulcanite to vinyl, a history of resins in restorative dentistry. J Prosthet Dent 87:364–379, 2002.
A comprehensive review of the introduction and evolution of polymeric materials in modern dentistry.
Sun SF: Physical Chemistry of Macromolecules: Basic Principles and Issues,
ed 2, Hoboken NJ, 2004, Wiley.
An integrated review of polymers and biological macromolecules biophysical chemistry and physical polymer chemistry. Structured to provide a clear and consistent overview of molecular structure, physical
properties, and basic structural properties and relationships.
48.e1

Ward IM, Sweeney J: An Introduction to Mechanical Properties of Solid
Polymers, ed 2, Hoboken, NJ, 2004, Wiley.
A comprehensive introduction to the mechanical behavior of solid
polymers, including mechanical relaxation and anisotropy, composites, viscoelasticity, yield behavior, and fracture of tough polymers.
Useful Websites for Dental Resins
(Accessed June 2020)
Polymer Chemistry Glossary. http://discovery.kcpc.usyd.edu.au/glossary
-all.html.
Polymer Science Learning Center. https://pslc.ws/macrog/level3.htm.
Virtual Textbook of Organic Chemistry—Polymers. https://www2.chemistry.msu.edu/faculty/reusch/VirtTxtJml/polymers.htm#polmr1.
Composite
Chou T-W, McCullough RL, Pipes RB: Composites, Sci Am 255(4):192–
203, 1986.
Habib E, Wang R, Wang Y, et al: Inorganic fillers for dental resin composites: Present and future, ACS Biomater Sci Eng 2:1–11, 2016.
Principle of Adhesion
Buonocore MG: The use of adhesives in dentistry, Springfield, IL,
1975, Charles C Thomas.
The problems associated with dental adhesives are nicely illustrated. It
is of interest that many of the procedures using bonding technology
discussed in this text have become commonplace.

48.e2

Glantz P: On wettability and adhesiveness: a study of enamel, dentine,
some restorative dental materials, and dental plaque, Odontol Rev
20(Suppl 17):1–132, 1969.
The author proposed that the reduction of dental caries by topical fluorides resulted from lowering the surface energy of the tooth
structure and thereby reducing plaque accumulation over a given
interval.
Good RJ: Contact angle, wetting, and adhesion: a critical review,
J Adhes Sci Technol 6:1269–1302, 1992.
An excellent review on the fundamentals of contact angle and wetting
and their relationship to adhesion.
Phillips RW, Ryge G: Proceedings on Adhesive Restorative Dental Materials,
Spencer, IN, 1961, Owen Litho Service.
The recommendations for critically important areas of research have
provided an impetus for investigations in this area.
Söderholm K-JM: Coatings in dentistry—A review of some basic
principles, Coatings 2:138–159, 2012.
This paper reviews fundamental principles of surface properties/adhesives since these topics form the foundation for most coating procedures used in dentistry.
Zisman WA: Influence of constitution on adhesion, Ind Eng Chem
55:18–38, 1963.
One of the pioneers in surface phenomena discusses parameters that
influence wetting.

