19

Clinical Research on Restorations
OUTLINE
What Is Evidence-Based Dentistry?

Clinical Analysis of Survival and Acceptability

Level of Evidence in Evidence-Based Dentistry

KEY TERMS
Case-control studies Type of study that examines two groups
at a point in time, usually groups with and without disease or
intervention, and makes inferences from these.
Evidence-based dentistry An approach to oral health care that
requires the judicious integration of systematic assessments of
clinically relevant scientific evidence, relating to the patient’s
oral and medical condition and history, with the dentist’s clinical
expertise and the patient’s treatment needs and preferences.

One of the most difficult areas in dental materials research is the
ability to predict their clinical performance through in vitro testing methodologies. The oral environment is almost impossible to
simulate in a laboratory setting because of the many variables that
need to be introduced, such as occlusal forces, the pH of the surrounding environment, diet, the buffering capacity of saliva, and
muscle and soft tissue cleansing action. As such, most in vitro
testing methodologies evaluate how a material responds to a specific testing condition, and the experimental data are used to differentiate between materials. The true test for a restorative dental
material is clinical performance, which includes longevity and
predictability of use. In recent years, there has been a push from
the medical community to implement evidence-based dentistry in
dental education and practice.

What Is Evidence-Based Dentistry?
Evidence-based dentistry (EBD) is defined as an approach to
oral health care that requires the judicious integration of systematic assessments of clinically relevant scientific evidence, relating
to the patient’s oral and medical condition and history, with the
dentist’s clinical expertise and the patient’s treatment needs and
preferences. The types of evidence were ranked, with laboratory
or standardized testing as being the lowest tier of evidence, followed by in vivo observations in the form of clinical studies and
case studies. The highest form of evidence is the controlled, randomized clinical trial, where clinical interventions are allocated
by chance and evaluated based on performance. The randomization eliminates the effect of multiple patient variables, which can
skew results.
390

Fractography The study of fractured surfaces of materials.
Prospective analysis study Type of study that plans interventions, examines the results of these interventions over a period
of time, and makes conclusions.
Randomized controlled clinical trial A prospective study that
randomizes participants and employs a control group.
Retrospective study Type of study that examines past occurrences and interventions and deducts results and conclusions.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are clinical trials essential in testing the performance of dental
biomaterials?

Level of Evidence in Evidence-Based
Dentistry
Among the available hierarchy of evidence, position statements
from professional boards, supported by systematic reviews and
meta-analyses of randomized controlled clinical trials (RCTs),
contribute to the highest level of evidence, followed by RCTs and
cohort studies. These are followed by case-control studies, crossover studies, cross-sectional studies, case studies, and case reports.
Finally, there are animal research and in vitro laboratory testing.
At each level of evidence, there is a body of knowledge, but not all
levels are equally useful for making patient care decisions. As we
progress up the pyramid (see Figure 18-1), the number of studies
and, correspondingly, the amount of available literature decreases
while at the same time, their relevance to answering clinical questions increases. From a dental material point of view, we will discuss the evidence in three categories: in vitro testing, observational
studies, and randomized control clinical studies.

In Vitro Testing
In Chapter 18, the role and relevance of in vitro testing methodologies were discussed. Although necessary, these standardized
tests often evaluate a limited number of variables in one test condition and are not representative of the true oral environment.

CHAPTER 19

Clinical Research on Restorations

391

• Figure 19-1 Scanning electron microscopy of ceramic surfaces before and after 27-day immersion in
buffer solutions. A, Baseline (no immersion). B, pH 2 buffer only. C, pH 7 buffer only. D, pH 10 buffer only.
E, Three cycles of 9-day cycling of pH 2, 7, and 10 sequence (3-day immersion per buffer). F, Three cycles
of 9-day cycling of pH 10, 2, and 7 sequence (3-day immersion per buffer). (From Esquivel-Upshaw JF,
Ren F, Hsu SM, et al: Novel testing for corrosion of glass-ceramics for dental applications, J Dent Res
97:296–302, 2018. doi:10.1177/0022034517732283. Epub 2017 Sep 18. PubMed PMID: 28922616;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5833181, with permission.)

The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) is an
independent, nongovernmental international organization that
develops specifications for products and services to ensure quality, safety, and efficiency. The ISO/Technical Committee 106 (TC
106) was specifically designed to develop standards for dental
materials testing. Unfortunately, dental manufacturers’ adherence
to ISO standards is desirable but not required. Additionally, most
of these in vitro tests cannot be correlated with what occurs in the
oral environment. For example, the ISO 14569 for wear of enamel
and a dental material is measured using a pin-on-disk system. The
setup is that one material is in the form of a disk or a pin and
the opposing material (preferably enamel) is on the other end.
Both materials are rotating in a circular motion on a flat plane.
The reality is that teeth are not flat, and the temporomandibular
joint functions on an arch and then a slide to produce a complex
movement along cuspal inclines and fossae. So, the wear of a dental material as measured by these standards cannot reasonably be
correlated with clinical performance.
Another example is the test for the chemical durability of
ceramic materials (ISO 6872:2015), which is conducted by
immersing the ceramic in a pH 2.4 buffer solution at 80 °C for
16 hours. This scenario does not represent the oral environment
in that the diet of each individual exposes the material to a myriad of pH changes. In addition, the buffering capacity of saliva
continually strives to neutralize this environment to pH 7.4, so
there is a constant fluctuation of pH in the oral cavity. A recent
in vitro study introduced the concept of pH cycling, where glassceramic disks were exposed to a sequence of pH 2, 7, and 10
buffer solutions over a period of 27 days at 80 °C. The effects of
immersion in buffer solutions on the surface of ceramic specimens are shown in Figure 19-1. This study demonstrated that
the surface degradation and material loss was significantly greater

during the pH-cycling testing methodology than the constant
immersion currently being employed as a standard test. The study
proposes that two dissolution mechanisms work synergistically
when the pH is cycled. In an acidic solution, an ionic exchange
mechanism occurs where the network modifiers (Al, Ca, K, Zn)
are exchanged for the ions in solution. This leaves a weakened
corrosive layer on the surface. In a basic solution, a total dissolution process occurs where the Si-O bonds are cleaved, and
the surface layer is corroded. In a constant-immersion environment, a steady state is reached where no further corrosion occurs.
However, in a pH-cycled environment, alternating between acid
and base, the basic solution will attack not only the Si-O bonds
but also the corroded layer produced by immersion in an acidic
environment. Thus there is a constant dissolution process that is
corroding the surface of ceramic. Although the pH cycling test
represents extremes in the oral environment, this method suggests that the current standard of constant immersion could be
underestimating the potential for surface degradation of materials in the mouth. Therefore in vitro testing is ranked as the lowest
form of evidence by EBD standards.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the best type of clinical study and why?

Observational Studies
In vivo observations are the second tier of dental evidence as classified by EBD. These types of studies include retrospective studies,
prospective studies, case-control studies, and cohort studies. The
dental literature is replete with observational studies that examine
the performance of dental materials over time.

392

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Retrospective Studies
Retrospective studies look back in time for applied interventions and
examine the outcome in the present time. For example, a retrospective
analysis can be performed on the longevity of the types of post and
core materials by performing a chart review, categorizing the types of
materials used, and evaluating the duration these post and cores were
in service intraorally. The advantages of these studies are that data are
readily available to be analyzed, and they are relatively inexpensive to
execute. The disadvantages include no standardization of placement of
these materials because there are multiple operators involved, records
may be incomplete, and the presence of multiple variables is very difficult to ascertain. Statistically, there is a higher chance of error with
these types of studies, resulting from confounding variables and bias.
Case-Control Studies
Case-control studies are also observational studies and are generally retrospective. These studies have an outcome status and an
exposure status that are not determined by the investigator. This
type of study will generally examine two groups, one with and one
without the outcome, to determine whether there is an exposure
and try to infer causation. An example of this could be the neurological effects of dental amalgam where investigators identify
groups with an outcome (neurological defects) and an exposure
status (presence of amalgam in their mouths) and try to find an
association. As with retrospective studies, these are relatively inexpensive, although they provide less evidence for causation.
Prospective Studies
Prospective studies can be observational or controlled and randomized, and they are planned longitudinal experiments—for
example, a study comparing the wear of enamel against metalceramic crowns and all-ceramic crowns. These two groups (or
cohorts) can be followed over a specified duration of time to
determine which material is more wear-friendly to enamel. These
studies are more expensive because they have to be planned, and
participants must be followed for long periods of time.

Randomized Controlled Clinical Trials
RCTs are considered the gold standard of evidence-based sciences.
These studies randomize the allocation of participants into groups
to minimize bias and confounding variables and are controlled,
meaning there is the presence of a control group where participants receive no treatment or the current standard of treatment.
These studies are prospective and longitudinal, which is one of
the reasons they are not very common because they are expensive
and logistically very difficult to conduct. An example of an RCT
is comparing the survival of metal-ceramic crowns and ceramicceramic crowns in three-unit fixed dental prosthesis. The metalceramic material serves as the control or the standard of care. The
objective is to determine whether there are advantages to the new
material over the old material and whether these outweigh the
disadvantages.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the factors that would limit interventions applied in a clinical study?

Clinical Analysis of Survival and Acceptability
As mentioned earlier, the best form of evidence is clinical performance studies, either as observational studies or randomized and
controlled interventional studies. Because human experiments are

well controlled and regulated by ethical boards, intervention has
to fall within a reasonable benefit-to-risk ratio. In other words, the
risks for conducting the study should not outweigh the benefits,
and no harm should be promoted in the experiment. For this reason, clinical studies are limited to mostly observation of occurrences. For example, a crack cannot purposely be introduced into
a ceramic crown and cemented onto a patient’s mouth to enable
observation of the phenomena of progression of slow crack growth
in vivo. Similarly, a biopsy of a healthy peri-implant site cannot
be performed for the sole purpose of being able to compare bacterial flora to a diseased peri-implant site. This section will describe
several in vivo measurements that are currently being employed
to assess the clinical performance of dental materials. First is a
description of how restorations are being assessed after periodic
performance intraorally. Second are two methods of measuring
and quantifying wear in vivo. Third is a forensic assessment of
clinical fractures through fractographic analysis.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the rationale for calibrating evaluators in a clinical study, and why is
there a need for dual evaluation?

Clinical Assessment of Restorations
Perhaps the oldest and most important clinical assessment tool
is the rating scale published by Cvar and Ryge in 1971 in the
U.S. Public Health Service Guidelines (USPHS; Box 19-1). The
original parameters used for evaluating dental restorations were
color match, marginal discoloration, marginal integrity, anatomical form, and the presence of dental caries. The parameters were
graded alfa (A), bravo (B), and charlie (C). These rankings were
created to differentiate restorations that were within the range of
excellent, acceptable, needing future replacement to prevent damage, and needing immediate replacement. The key to the success
of this grading scale is the systematic calibration of the reviewers to ensure that (1) the evaluators are familiar with the grading
scale, (2) they possess the visual discrimination for assessment,
and (3) they maintain consistency in grading longitudinal studies. Another requirement is the implementation of dual evaluators
and a process by which they can resolve differences in grading. The
original study noted that the accuracy of a trained and calibrated
evaluator is about 85%. The inclusion of a second trained and
calibrated evaluator increases the accuracy of the rating to 98%.
One aspect of this study that was never really implemented is the
universal collection of photographs and study models to enable
calibration across clinical studies. With time, modified versions
of the clinical assessment tool have come to include additional
parameters, such as occlusion, postoperative sensitivity, fracture,
retention, and others, depending on the needs of the study and
the restoration being evaluated. Perhaps the biggest obstacle to
clinical studies is cost, which largely explains why most studies
have no controls and only one evaluator.
In 2007, the Fédération Dentaire International (FDI) released
its own version of the clinical assessment of restorations. The FDI
subdivided the different parameters according to esthetic, functional, and biological groups (Box 19-2) for a total of 16 parameters in all. The grading scale was expanded to include clinically
excellent, clinically good, clinically satisfactory, clinically unsatisfactory, and clinically poor. To facilitate calibration between
multiple sites, the FDI also posted an online calibration guide,
but this, of course, is no replacement for the hands-on clinical

CHAPTER 19

• BOX 19.1

Original Cvar and Ryge Criteria Used to
Evaluate Restorations

• BOX 19.2

Color Match
Oscar (O)

Anterior restoration, invisible without a
mirror

Alfa (A)

Posterior restoration, matching the adjacent
tooth in color, shade, and translucency

Bravo (B)

Posterior restoration; the mismatch in
color, shade, and translucency between the
restoration and the adjacent tooth within
normal range

Charlie (C)

Posterior restoration; the mismatch in
color, shade, and translucency between the
restoration and the adjacent tooth outside
normal range

Cavo-Surface Marginal Discoloration
Alfa (A)

No discoloration anywhere on the margin
between the restoration and the tooth

Bravo (B)

Discoloration present but does not penetrate
along the margin toward the pulp

Charlie (C)

Discoloration present and penetrates along
the margin toward the pulp

Anatomical Form
Alfa (A)

Restoration continuous with existing
anatomical form

Bravo (B)

Restoration undercontoured, i.e.,
discontinuous with existing anatomical form
but dentin/base not exposed

Charlie (C)

Restoration undercontoured, i.e.,
discontinuous with existing anatomical form
and dentin/base exposed

Marginal Adaption
Alfa (A)

No visible evidence of a crevice along the
margin into which an explorer penetrates

Bravo (B)

Visible evidence of a crevice along the
margin into which an explorer penetrates
but dentin/base not exposed

Charlie (C)

Visible crevice along the margin with
exposed dentin/base; the restoration is not
mobile, fractured, or missing in part of the
tooth

Delta (D)

Restoration mobile, fractured, or missing in
part of the tooth

Caries
Alfa (A)

Caries absent along the restoration margin

Bravo (B)

Caries present along the restoration margin

calibration that occurs. As with the USPHS scale, investigators are
able to tailor the criteria based on their studies and needs.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What qualities of wear are desirable in a dental material?

Clinical Research on Restorations

393

Fédération Dentaire International (FDI)
Revised Criteria for Evaluating Clinical
Restorations

Esthetic Criteria
Surface luster
Staining: (a) surface and (b) margin
Color match and translucency
Esthetic anatomical form

Functional Criteria
Fracture of material and retention
Marginal adaptation
Occlusal contour and wear
Approximal anatomical form: (a) contact point and (b) contour
Radiographic examination, where applicable
Patient’s view

Biological Criteria
Postoperative sensitivity and tooth vitality
Recurrence of caries, erosion, abfraction
Tooth integrity
Periodontal response
Adjacent mucosa
Oral and general health
For all three groups, the following gradings are used for evaluation:
Clinically excellent/very good
Clinically good
Clinically sufficient/satisfactory
Clinically unsatisfactory
Clinically poor

Wear Analysis
One of the most important criteria for dental materials is durability and compatibility with opposing structures. These two parameters are clearly measured through wear analysis, in that these
materials must be durable enough to withstand occlusal forces
by not wearing away and at the same time exhibiting comparable
wear of opposing enamel. Wear of restorative material surfaces
can cause damage to the opposing structures. A worn surface
usually translates into a roughened surface, which can encourage
plaque accumulation, caries formation, and wear of the opposing tooth surface. Consequently, worn surfaces can result in a
decrease in the occlusal vertical dimension, which could then
lead to occlusal trauma, periodontal disease, and temporomandibular joint dysfunction. As mentioned earlier, the standard test
for wear is not representative of occlusal function. Several wear
machines or chewing simulators were developed that introduced
varying load, vertical and horizontal movement, and thermocycling. However, none of these chewing simulators was found to
correlate well with clinical scenarios. Therefore the best measure
is to determine the wear of enamel and dental materials in a clinical setting. There are two ways to quantify clinical wear: indirect
and direct.

Indirect Method
The indirect method is the most commonly used method for measuring clinical wear. The method is indirect because replicas are
made using an elastomeric impression of the area of interest (dental material and/or opposing tooth enamel), and stone models
are made where the measurements are conducted. The measuring

394

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

devices are diverse and can include laser scanners, micro-computed tomography (micro-CT), or surface profilometers.
A laser scanner produces a three-dimensional (3-D) image
through the movement of an object (in this case, a tooth replica)
under the projection of a laser beam. The reflection of the crosssection profile of the object is detected by sensors, which produces an
image consisting of “point clouds.” Each point represents x-, y-, and
z-coordinates on the scanned surface. Each profile can then be combined and transformed into high-resolution images through advanced software that allows for comparison and measurement. The edge
effect is an error or artifact that is produced when the laser beam hits a
sharp edge or the bottom of a groove, producing overshot reflections.
Laser beam measurements are also affected by surface reflections of
the material being scanned, so stone or elastomeric impression materials are used as replicates to minimize these reflections.
Laser scanners can either have red or blue laser beams. Higherwavelength beams (red beams) have lower resolution, more diffraction, and less intensity compared with the blue laser beams.
Depending on the nature of the material being scanned, the laser
can penetrate through the material to cause a diffusion on the surface, which can result in a loss of focus on the surface being measured and sends inaccurate readings back to the detector, which in
turn leads to invalid measurements.
When measuring the clinical wear of a dental material, a baseline
impression and a replica model of the teeth involved in the measurement are first made. Depending on the study protocol, an impression and replica are once again produced during the designated
follow-up time, either in months or years. The wear that occurred
between baseline and the period of interest are measured using specialized scanners with software that can superimpose images by using
known landmarks and calculating volume loss and maximum wear

depth. Figure 19-2 demonstrates teeth-opposing ceramic crowns
that were monitored for 10 months. Baseline and period replicas
are shown on the left, with yellow arrows pointing to areas that are
worn. A laser scanner device was used to superimpose the two replicas. The image on the right demonstrates red areas that highlight
the areas on the teeth where wear occurred. The maximum wear or
the maximum-wear depth value is perhaps more important than
calculating the volume loss of a material. Volumetric wear can occur
over a large surface area and therefore not be detrimental to the
integrity of the tooth or the restoration if the depth is shallow and
remains superficial. However, maximum wear indicates maximum
depth, which can prove to be more damaging. For example, when
calculating the wear of enamel, if volume loss is large but occurs
over a wide area, the wear can be limited to enamel. However, if
the maximum wear refers to depth and the value is large, then there
is a possibility of wear through the dentin. There are several laser
scanners available on the market that are used for quantifying wear.
Unfortunately, the validity of these measurements is rarely verified
with calibrated instruments such as micro-CT or a profilometer. As
mentioned earlier, there are errors that can be produced from the
laser-scanning process. Figure 19-3 demonstrates the discrepancies
between a laser scanner and surface profilometer in measuring the
depth profile of indentations produced by different-grit diamond
burs on a ceramic surface to simulate wear. This in vitro study evaluated the validity of a red laser scanner in measuring depth and
volume against a surface profilometer, in addition to the effect of
bur grit on these measurements. Gross over- and underestimations
of depth and volume wear measurements were observed with the
laser scanner compared with the surface profilometer. These errors
probably resulted from a combination of the edge effect mentioned
previously, the nature of the material being scanned, and the high

• Figure 19-2 Wear areas (yellow arrows) on teeth noted after 10 months of service on teeth opposing an
all-ceramic fixed dental prosthesis. Comparison software on the far right reveals red areas indicating where
wear occurred. (From Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Young H, Jones J, et al: In vivo wear of enamel by a lithiadisilicate core ceramic used for posterior FPDs: First-year result, Int J Prosthodont 19:391–396, 2006.)

CHAPTER 19

395

Smooth

0
Depth (μm)

Clinical Research on Restorations

-65
-130
-195
Medium

Depth (μm)

0
-65
-130
-195

Rough

Depth (μm)

0
-65
-130
-195
0

1000
Distance (μm)

2000

• Figure 19-3 Depth-profile comparison between laser scanner (red)
and profilometer (blue) indicating major differences in depth and width of
indentations caused by different-grit diamond burs. Edge effect, artifact,
and surface reflectance could be partially responsible for the inaccuracies. (From Hsu SM, Ren F, Abdulhameed N, et al: Comprehensive analysis of laserscanner validity used for measurement of wear, J Oral Rehabil
46:503–510, 2019.)
wavelength of the beams. Nonetheless, although laser scanners are
a convenient tool for measuring clinical wear, the users have to be
judicious in determining the accuracy and the validity of the wear
measurements.
Micro-CT can also be used to measure clinical wear using the
indirect method. Micro-CT uses x-rays to see through an object
slice by slice. These two-dimensional (2-D) images are then rendered through a software program to produce a 3-D model of the
object or analyzed in cross-sections. For the purpose of wear analysis,
wear can be quantified through analysis of the replicas. Figure 19-4
demonstrates the mesial and occlusal views of a dentoform tooth
that has been placed in a chewing simulator to receive random wear
at multiple sites. The micro-CT was used to scan the tooth before
and after wear occurred, and the results are shown in Figure 19-4,
where the colored areas refer to the areas of wear, which are quantified according to the grid shown on the side.
Surface profilometry can also be used for quantitative wear
evaluation using the indirect technique. The contact profilometer
has a stylus that traverses the surface of the object being measured,
whereas the noncontact profilometer uses a laser beam or white
light to probe the surface. The contact stylus is usually a metal
or diamond ranging from 2 to 20 μm in diameter loaded with a
contact load of few millinewtons while contacting the surface. The
scan can provide a map of the surface topography. Although this
method is considered precise for depth profilometry, the process is
time consuming. For this type of measuring device to be effective,

• Figure 19-4 Three-dimensional reconstructed image from micro-CT
scan of a dentoform tooth demonstrating wear. A, Mesial (or distal) aspect.
B, Occlusal surface. The color bar to the side reflects wear depth in millimeters. (From Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Hsu SM, Bohórquez A, et al: Novel
methodology for measuring intraoral wear in enamel and dental restorative
materials, Clin Exp Dent Res 8:1–9, 2020, doi:10.1002/cre2.322. PubMed
PMID: 32955159; with permission.)

reference points need to be placed on the teeth of interest to orient
the user to the exact area being measured.

Direct Method
With the advent of digital impressions, this method uses the
technology of intraoral scanning to allow quantitative wear
measurement. The teeth to be measured are scanned at baseline
and then again at periods of interest. These scans are then compared using comparison software that essentially superimposes
both images and identifies the differences in depth and volume
between the two. The process of intraoral scanning is technique
sensitive. Some intraoral scanners use a powder spray of zinc
oxide to minimize the reflection of enamel during the scanning
process. The area being scanned has to be completely isolated so

396

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

• Figure 19-5 Direct method of wear measurement using intraoral scanner. A, A ceramic crown on mandibular left first molar. B, Opposing left maxillary quadrant. C, The result of superimposing baseline and
1-year scan to quantify the wear that occurred on the ceramic crown (pointer) by the comparison software
using the adjacent second molar as the enamel control. The color bar to the side reflects wear depth on
the ceramic restoration and the enamel control in millimeters. D, The result of opposing maxillary first molar. (From Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Hsu SM, Bohórquez A, et al: Novel methodology for measuring intraoral
wear in enamel and dental restorative materials, Clin Exp Dent Res 8:1–9, 2020. doi:10.1002/cre2.322.
PubMed PMID: 32955159; with permission.)

that saliva does not mix with the powder. The powdery sludge
can become thick and cause an error in the scanning process.
There is also the steep learning curve associated with operating
the software. The scanned images have to be adeptly cropped
to minimize noise in the superimposition. Figure 19-5 is an
example of the direct method. Figure 19-5, A & B depict clinical
images of two opposing quadrants, with the crown on the mandibular left molar being the area of interest and the opposing
tooth on the maxillary. These teeth were scanned at baseline and
then again at 6 months, and the images (Figure 19-5, C & D)
demonstrate the amount of wear (color grid in millimeters) during this period of time. Although this is perhaps the most convenient and expedient method for quantifying wear, the technical
sensitivity and the errors that could be associated with scanners
have to be considered.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What forensic information can we ascertain from fractographic analyses?

Critical Observation and Fractographic Analysis
A fractured restoration can fall under the modified version of the
USPHS under functional criteria. However, fracture surfaces often
reveal information about how and why the fracture occurred. That
is why the critical observation and analysis of fractures deserves a
separate section in this chapter.

Characteristics of Fracture Surface
Fractography is the study of the fracture surfaces of materials.
Through characteristics visible on the surface of these fractures,
the origin of the fracture, the load and orientation of the fracture, and the progression of the failure can be determined for
the particular material. There have been significant advances in
the application of fractography to the understanding of fracture
mechanics. Several works have identified the key parameters
that are important to the understanding of why fractures occur.
When a material fractures in a brittle manner, the fracture surface
records the event in such a way that many important features are
made clear. A schematic diagram of a typical crack in glass or
ceramic is depicted in Figure 19-6. Some very prominent features
of these cracks are the origin, mirror, mist, and hackle. These features, when visible by magnification, can usually give an indication as to the propagation direction of the fracture. The presence
of any residual stresses can be determined from the fractured area
and the stress at which fractures occur, which can be measured
from the crack size.
Almost all mechanically induced cracks can be idealized as a
semielliptical, sharp crack with depth, a, and width, 2b (Figure 19-6).
Recall the discussion of the Griffith energy approach to fracture and
the following equation (Chapter 4, Fracture Toughness):
K lc  Y  f c  2 E c ,

(1)

CHAPTER 19

Clinical Research on Restorations

397

Crack path Porcelain
Interaction
zone
Metal

• Figure 19-6 Schematic diagram of crack in a brittle material with the
critical flaw size and the different features that can enable calculation of
stress and the direction of fracture.

where KIc is the critical stress intensity factor (fracture toughness),
Y is a geometrical factor that accounts for the shape of the fractureinitiating crack, E is the elastic (Young’s) modulus, c is the radius of
an equivalent semicircular or semielliptical crack (c = ab ), and γc
is the critical fracture energy (i.e., all the energy involved in fracture, including the creation of new surfaces). The small semiellipse
in Figure 19-6 represents the initial flaw size, and the large semiellipse is the critical flaw size that leads to fracture. Because the value
of KIc can be obtained from testing standardized specimens, the level
of stress causing the fracture can be calculated by the measurement
of equivalent semielliptical crack, c. For further information on the
process involved with fractographic analysis, the reader is referred
to the fractographic books and articles mentioned at the end of this
chapter.
Clinical fractures of metal-ceramic restorations, although rare,
still occur, especially when a new alloy or veneering porcelain is
being used or when a new technology has been adopted. As is
generally true for all dental materials, there is a learning curve
associated with the initial use of new products. Although there is
an infinite number of fracture paths that may occur, three types
are of particular importance in diagnosing the cause of fracture.
Figure 19-7 shows the fracture paths that have occurred primarily at three sites in a metal-ceramic crown: (1) along the interfacial region between opaque porcelain (P) and the bonding zone
(I) between porcelain and the metal substrate (top), (2) within
the bonding zone (center), and (3) between the metal and the
bonding zone (bottom). For conventional metal-ceramic crowns
made from cast copings, the bonding zone is synonymous with
the metal oxide layer.

Characterization of Fracture Surface
To characterize the principal site of fracture, a low-magnification
examination of the fracture surface may be sufficient in a few
cases. However, a magnification of 3 to 100 times is more often
required because minute microstructural details such as pores
may reveal wake-hackle patterns that clearly show the direction
of crack propagation in these areas. Fractographers seek important
crack features, such as hackle, twist hackle, wake hackle, arrest
lines, and compression curl, to lead them toward the critical flaw
or source of crack initiation and the possibility of identifying one
or more mechanisms of failure.
Each of the three principal fracture paths in Figure 19-7 is
indicative of excessive tensile stress, a material defect, or a processing factor. The location and appearance of a fracture sur-

• Figure 19-7 Cross-sectional illustration of three principal types of interfacial zone fracture in a metal-ceramic crown.

face are major factors used to determine the cause of fracture.
For fractures that are confined to the occlusal surface of posterior crowns, a cone-crack type of fracture (apex of the cone
at the fracture surface and the base of the cone extending into
the veneer) suggests that localized loading at small contact areas
may be the cause. Fractures that occur in the proximal occlusal
area of the crowns may be caused by inadequate support of the
veneer by the core framework material. Fractures that occur well
away from the sites of loading may be caused by thermal incompatibility stresses. The procedures for obtaining evidence from
fractured all-ceramic restorations are the same as those used for
metal-ceramic restorations.
When fractures occur, making a vinyl polysiloxane impression
of the fracture site as soon as possible is useful for future fractographic analysis. All information on the crown or bridge should
be recorded, including the visual appearance of the fracture site. A
photograph is also very helpful in analyzing the potential cause of
fracture. The impression allows a replica of the fracture surface to
be made from epoxy resin. The replica allows fractographic observations of the fracture surface to be made, and these models can
then be examined by a fractography expert under low magnification using optical microscopy and stereomicroscopy, followed by
scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The location of the critical
flaw indicates the origin of the fracture. Fracture surface markings observed on the replica assist the expert in determining the
origin and confirming the suspected cause of fracture. Shown in
Figure 19-8, A is a residual section of a fractured Procera AllCeram
alumina-based crown with a glass-phase veneer that fractured after
4 years of clinical service. The cause of fracture can be assessed by
visual inspection, characterization of principal fracture features,
detailed examination of optical microscopy and stereomicroscopy
images, and if necessary, SEM images. The stereomicroscopic
analyses of the retrieved fractured segment revealed the fracture
paths that are shown in Figure 19-8, B. They include crack initiation (areas 1 and 3), crack propagation (areas 2 and 4), and
completion of fracture (area 5). Area 3 illustrates the initiation of
a cone crack that could have led to cone-type fracture discussed
earlier but did not propagate far enough to cause the bulk fracture. This fracture analysis illustrates incidental surface damage in

398

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

• Figure 19-9 Inspection for cracks using fiberoptic transillumination
prior to cementation is important in improving the predictability of ceramic
crowns.

• Figure 19-8 Analysis of a fractured restoration. A, Fractured Procera
AllCeram premolar crown. B, Sketch of key findings after stereomicroscopic analyses of the retrieved fractured segment. The initiating crack
occurred at the mesial margin (area 1) and propagated upward approximately 2 mm before crown fracture occurred in areas 2 and 4, terminating
in the compression curl area 5. Area 3 represents contact damage within
the occlusal veneering ceramic that does not extend into the alumina core
ceramic. C, Confirmation of the finding by scanning electron microscope
image. (From Scherrer SS, Quinn GD, Quinn JB: Fractographic failure
analysis of a Procera® AllCeram crown, Dent Mater 24:1107–1113, 2008.)

an area where crack propagation was localized only in the veneer
ceramic. Figure 19-8, C is the confirmation of five fracture surface
features in the sketch by the SEM image. This forensic analysis of
how the fracture progressed was made possible by the different
landmarks that are prominent on fractured brittle surfaces.

The fractographic procedures described previously are based on
the assumption that the prosthesis was free of cracks during tryin and during cementation. However, dentists are not typically
trained to inspect prostheses received from the lab using fiberoptic transillumination. Examination under such lighting can
reveal surface and subsurface cracks that may exist in the ceramic
and metal-ceramic prostheses either before or after try-in for fit.
Figure 19-9 shows a laboratory technician who is using a fiberoptic light source to inspect a ceramic prosthesis for cracks that may
be hidden from typical fluorescent or incandescent light sources.
Many factors are associated with the fracture of all-ceramic
prostheses. These factors fall into one of eight categories: (1)
inherent surface defects, (2) processing defects, (3) loading (bite
force and load orientation), (4) design, (5) material properties, (6)
residual stress, (7) procedural errors, and (8) diet. Within these
categories, the following variables may contribute to crack initiation, crack propagation, chipping, and bulk fracture: surface
treatment, excessive loading during try-in, bruxing loads, loading location, load distribution, load magnitude, transient cooling
stresses, residual cooling stresses, inadequate tooth preparation,
improper core framework design, inadequate crown thickness,
inadequate core thickness, improper connector size, quality of
the cement layer, bond quality of ceramic veneer to core ceramic,
voids in the cement layer or at the cement/ceramic interface,
and the elastic moduli of component and supporting substrate
materials. To reduce the risk for ceramic fracture, sufficient tooth
reduction, sufficient thickness of the ceramic, adequate prosthesis
design, distributed vertical loading, and meticulous attention to
the recommended manufacturers’ procedures are required.

Classification of Ceramic Restoration Fractures
Grading fractures of ceramic restorations has been recommended
and is based loosely on the original USPHS criteria for grading
restorations. Heinzte and Rousson introduced the classification in
2010, with Class 1 being minor, no intervention required; Class
2, repair was needed; and Class 3, replacement was required.
Figures 19-10 to 19-12 illustrate three clinical scenarios of what
these classes look like clinically. Figure 19-10, A shows a veneered
zirconia crown with a class 1 lingual fracture. The fracture was small
enough that even the patient did not know there was anything

CHAPTER 19

Clinical Research on Restorations

399

• Figure 19-10 Class 1 fracture. A, Minor fracture on the lingual side of a ceramic-ceramic crown; no
intervention required. B, Scanning electron microscope identifies the fracture origin (arrow) on the occlusal
surface and propagated gingivally, as shown by multiple arrest lines (arrow). (From Esquivel-Upshaw JF,
Mecholsky JJ Jr, Clark AE, et al: Factors influencing the survival of implant-supported ceramic-ceramic
prostheses: A randomized, controlled clinical trial, J Dent X3:100017, 2020; with permission.)

• Figure 19-11 Class 2 fracture. A, Fracture at distal edge (arrow) of a veneered zirconia; repair needed.
B, Fractographic analysis identifies the critical flaw on the occlusal surface of the restoration. (From
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Mecholsky JJ Jr, Clark AE, et al: Factors influencing the survival of implant-supported ceramic-ceramic prostheses: A randomized, controlled clinical trial, J Dent X3:100017, 2020, with
permission.)

wrong. SEM analysis (Figure 19-10, B) reveals the origin of the
fracture to be on the occlusal surface of the crown. Figure 19-11,
A is a class 2 fracture of a veneered zirconia crown on the distal
edge. Although the indication is to have this repaired because the
fractured surface is substantial, these repairs made with composite
resin and a silanating agent usually fail within a couple of years.
Fractographic analysis (Figure 19-11, B) revealed that the fracture also originated from the occlusal surface of the prosthesis.
Figure 19-12, A & B is a class 3 fracture, also of a veneered zirconia crown. The fracture went through the veneer and fractured the
core substructure. However, fractographic analysis (Figure 19-12,
C-E) revealed that the fracture originated from the occlusal surface
and propagated through a series of multiple fractures.

In summary, the performance of dental materials is best determined through clinical trials and observations because there are
no in vitro tests that mimic the oral environment. However,
there are limits to what can be measured intraorally, and interventions have to be ethical. The contributing factors to failure
are very difficult to ascertain without performing a systematic
forensic analysis (such as in fractography). The biggest drawback
is that these clinical tests, if done properly, are expensive and
very time consuming. By the time the results are released for
a poorly performing material, the manufacturers might have
already moved on to the promotion of another discovery. Thus
the feedback that should be gleaned to improve the next generation of materials is lost.

400

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

• Figure 19-12 Class 3 fracture. A, Occlusal view of a fractured veneered zirconia; needs replacement.
B, Mesial-facial view showing fracture through the zirconia core. C–E, Series of fractographic analysis
demonstrates multiple fractures that propagated from one on the occlusal surface. Circles indicate the
area expanded in the succeeding images. (From Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Clark AE, Shuster J, et al: Factors
influencing the survival of implant-supported ceramic-ceramic prostheses: A randomized, controlled clinical trial, J Dent X3:100017, 2020, with permission.)

Selected Readings
Cvar JF, Ryge G: Reprint of criteria for the clinical evaluation of dental
restorative materials, 1971, Clin Oral Invest 9:215–232, 2005.
Esquivel JF, Kim MJ, Abdulhameed N, et al: Randomized clinical study
of wear of enamel antagonists against polished monolithic zirconia
crowns, J Dent 68:19–27, 2018.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Clark AE, Shuster J, et al: Randomized clinical trial
of implant-supported ceramic-ceramic and metal-ceramic fixed dental prostheses: Preliminary results, J Prosthodont 23:73–82, 2014.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Ren F, Hsu SM, et al: Novel testing for corrosion of
glass-ceramics for dental applications, J Dent Res 97:296–302, 2018.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Rose WF, Barrett AA, et al: In vivo wear of core
ceramic, veneers, and enamel antagonists at three years, Dent Mater
28:615–621, 2012.

Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Rose WF, Oliveira ER, et al: Randomized, controlled clinical trial of bilayer-ceramic and metal-ceramic crown performance, J Prosthodont 22:166–173, 2013.
Freiman SW, Mecholsky JJ: The Fracture of Brittle Materials: Testing and
Analysis, Hoboken, NJ, 2012, John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Hickel R, Peschke A, Tyas M, et al: FDI World Dental Federation clinical criteria for the evaluation of direct and indirect restorations.
Update and clinical examples, J Adhes Dent 12:259–272, 2010.
McMurphy TB, Harris CA, Griggs JA: Accuracy and precision of fractal
dimension measured on model surfaces, Dent Mater 30:302–307, 2014.
Mehl A, Gloger W, Kunzelmann K-H, et al: A new optical 3-D device for
the detection of wear, J Dent Res 76:1799–1807, 1997.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult
.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Cvar JF, Ryge G: Reprint of criteria for the clinical evaluation of dental
restorative materials, 1971, Clin Oral Invest 9:215–232, 2005.
Ekfeldt A, Fransson B, Soderlund B, et al: Wear resistance of some prosthodontic materials in vivo, Acta Odontol Scand 51:99–107, 1993.
Esquivel JF, Kim MJ, Abdulhameed N, et al: Randomized clinical study
of wear of enamel antagonists against polished monolithic zirconia
crowns, J Dent 68:19–27, 2018.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Clark AE, Shuster J, et al: Randomized clinical trial
of implant-supported ceramic-ceramic and metal-ceramic fixed dental
prostheses: Preliminary results, J Prosthodont 23:73–82, 2014.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Dieng F, Clark AE, et al: Surface degradation of
dental ceramics as a function of environment pH. J Dent Res 92:467–
471, 2013.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Ren F, Hsu SM, et al: Novel testing for corrosion of
glass-ceramic for dental applications, J Dent Res 97:296–302, 2018.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Rose WF, Barrett AA, et al: In vivo wear of core
ceramic, veneers, and enamel antagonists at three years, Dent Mater
28:615–621, 2012.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Rose WF, Oliveira ER, et al: Randomized, controlled clinical trial of bilayer-ceramic and metal-ceramic crown performance, J Prosthodont 22:166–173, 2013.
Folwaczny M, Mehl A, Kunzelmann KH, et al: Determination of changes
on tooth-colored cervical restorations in vivo using a three-dimensional laser scanning device, Eur J Oral Sci 108:233–238, 2000.
Freiman SW, Mecholsky JJ: The Fracture of Brittle Materials: Testing and
Analysis, Hoboken, NJ, 2012, John Wiley & Sons Inc.

Heintze SD, Cavalleri A, Forjanic M, et al: A comparison of three different methods for the quantification of the in vitro wear of dental
materials, Dent Mater 22:1051–1062, 2006.
Hickel R, Peschke A, Tyas M, et al: FDI World Dental Federation—
clinical criteria for the evaluation of direct and indirect restorations.
Update and clinical examples, J Adhes Dent 12:259–272, 2010.
Hsu SM, Ren F, Abdulhameed N, et al: Comprehensive analysis of
laserscanner validity used for measurement of wear, J Oral Rehabil
46:503–510, 2019.
International Organization for Standardization: Dental Materials – Guidance on Testing of Wear – Part 2: Wear by Two- and/or Three Body Contact (ISO 14569-2:2001), Geneva, Switzerland, 2001.
Lambrechts P, Braem M, Vuylsteke-Wauters M, et al: Quantitative in vivo
wear of human enamel, J Dent Res 68:1752–1754, 1989.
McMurphy TB, Harris CA, Griggs JA: Accuracy and precision of fractal dimension measured on model surfaces, Dent Mater 30:302–307,
2014.
Mehl A, Gloger W, Kunzelmann K-H, et al: A new optical 3-D device for
the detection of wear, J Dent Res 76:1799–1807, 1997.
Passos VF, Melo MAS, Vasconcellos AA, et al: Comparison of methods
for quantifying dental wear caused by erosion and abrasion, Microsc
Res Techniq 76:178–183, 2013.
Rodriguez JM, Bartlett DW: A comparison of two-dimensional and
three-dimensional measurements of wear in a laboratory investigation, Dent Mater 26:e221–e225, 2010.
Whitehead SA, Shearer AC, Watts DC, et al: Comparison of two stylus methods for measuring surface texture, Dent Mater 15:79–86,
1999.

388.e1

