13

Auxiliary Materials
OUTLINE
Classification of Impression Materials

Inelastic Impression Materials

Elastomeric Impression Materials

Gypsum Products

Hydrocolloids

Dental Waxes

KEY TERMS
IMPRESSION MATERIALS
Base paste (base putty) The component that forms the main
three-dimensional structure of a final impression.
Catalyst paste (catalyst putty) A component of a polymerization
reaction that decreases the energy required for the reaction and
usually does not become part of the final product; however, the
term catalyst has been used for the structural component of
dental materials that initiates the polymerization reaction.
Colloid A solid, liquid, or gaseous substance made up of large molecules or masses of smaller molecules that remain in suspension
in a surrounding continuous medium of different matter.
Elastomer Any of various polymers having the elastic properties
of natural rubber.
Gel A network of fibrils forming a weak, slightly elastic brush-heap
structure of hydrocolloid; also, the solid network structure of a
crosslinked polymer.
Gelation The process of transforming a hydrocolloid from a sol to
a gel.
Imbibition The displacement of one fluid by another immiscible
fluid in a hydrocolloid. In the context of impression materials,
imbibition is the uptake by agar or alginate when immersed in
water.
Inelastic Incapable of sustaining significant elastic deformation
without fracturing under stress.
Model A positive full-scale replica of teeth, soft tissues, and
restored structures used as a diagnostic aid for the construction
of orthodontic and prosthetic appliances; a facsimile used for
display purposes.
Pseudoplastic A non-Newtonian behavior of fluids whose
viscosity decreases under shear strain until it reaches a nearly
constant value. Thus, the more rapidly pseudoplastic fluids are
stirred or forced through a syringe, the less viscous (thinner) and
more easily they flow.
Shear thinning The tendency for viscosity to decrease as the
shearing rate increases (see pseudoplastic and thixotropy).
Static mixing A technique of transforming two paste-like materials (or fluids) into a homogeneous mixture without mechanical
stirring; two streams of material are forced into a mixer cylinder,
and the stationary elements in the mixer divide and recombine
the feed materials and keep the material streams spiraling
through the cylinder simultaneously.

Syneresis The expression of fluid onto the surface of gel structures.
Thixotropy The property of certain gels or fluids to become less
viscous when sufficient energy in the form of impact force or
vibration is applied; at rest, they require a specific duration
to return to the previous viscous state. Both pseudoplasticity
and thixotropy are shear-thinning processes; the difference is
that changes in pseudoplastic viscosity do not exhibit the time
dependency characteristic of thixotropy.
Viscoelastic/viscoelasticity The ability of a material to strain
instantaneously like an elastic solid during rapid stretching or
to resist shear flow and to strain linearly over time (like honey)
when a stress is applied continuously.

GYPSUM PRODUCTS
Dental plaster (plaster of Paris) The beta form of calcium sulfate
hemihydrate (CaSO4• ½H2O).
Dental stone The alpha form of calcium sulfate hemihydrate
(CaSO4• ½H2O).
Hygroscopic setting expansion The expansion that occurs when
gypsum or a gypsum-bonded investment sets while immersed
in water (usually heated to approximately 38 °C [100 °F]).
Normal setting expansion The expansion that occurs when gypsum or a gypsum-bonded investment sets in ambient air.

WAXES
Baseplate wax Dental wax provided in sheet form to establish the
initial arch form in the construction of complete dentures.
Bite wax A wax form used to record the occlusal surfaces of teeth
as an aid in establishing maxillo-mandibular relationships.
Boxing wax A wax sheet form used as a border at the perimeter of
an impression to provide an enclosed boundary for the base of the
cast to be made from a poured material such as gypsum or resin.
Corrective wax (dental impression wax) A thermoplastic wax
that is used to make a type of dental impression.
Dental wax (1) A low-molecular-weight ester of fatty acids derived
from natural or synthetic components, such as petroleum
derivatives, that soften to a plastic state at a relatively low temperature. (2) A mixture of two or more waxes and additives used
as an aid for the production of gypsum casts, the production of
nonmetallic denture bases, the registering of jaw relations, and
laboratory work.
275

276

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Flow Relative ability of wax to plastically deform when heated
slightly above body temperature.
Inlay wax A specialized dental wax that can be applied to dies
to form direct or indirect patterns for the lost wax technique,
which is used for the casting of metals or hot pressing of
ceramics.

Refractory Capable of sustaining exposure to a high temperature
without significant degradation.
Sprue The mold channel through which molten metal or ceramic
flows into a mold cavity.
Sticky wax A type of dental wax that exhibits high adhesion to
dry, clean surfaces when heated to a plastic condition.

Prosthetic devices and restorations are made to adapt to the
anatomy of the oral tissue receiving the device. If the device is
to be fabricated by the lost wax technique, a pattern with the
exact dimensions of the device must be made with a material
that is stable at room temperature but that can be removed by
melting or burning out. The pattern usually is made of wax.
To ensure close adaptation or fit for cementation of the fabricated device, the pattern must be fabricated on a model or die.
A model (cast) or die can be made from gypsum products using
an impression mold (or negative likeness) of a dental structure
(Figure 13-1). Gypsum is a powder that, when mixed with water,
becomes flowable and capable of being poured into an impression mold and capturing and reproducing the fine detail of the
impression. Gypsum models are dimensionally stable during the
entire process of pattern making and are resistant to scratching during pattern fabrication. To duplicate the anatomical form
of the oral tissue, an impression material that is initially moldable is forced against the tissue and then sets. After removal, the
impression should remain stable while models or dies are being
made. These materials are required for making prostheses but do
not become part of a final prosthesis. They are thus known as
auxiliary materials. Impression materials, gypsum products, and
waxes have multiple applications in addition to making prostheses. This chapter focuses on the use and relevant properties for
general applications.

Classification of Impression Materials

CRITICAL QUESTION
How are dental impression materials classified?

To produce accurate replicas of intra- and extraoral tissues, the
impression materials should be (1) sufficiently fluid to adapt to
the oral tissues, (2) viscous enough to be contained in a tray, (3)
able to transform (set) into a rubbery or rigid solid in the mouth in
a reasonable time (<7 minutes), (4) resistant to distortion or tearing when removed from the mouth, (5) dimensionally stable long
enough to allow one or more casts to be poured, (6) biocompatible,
and (7) cost-effective in terms of the required processing time and
the expense of the materials and associated processing equipment.
By their composition, the impression materials are divided into
three major groups: nonaqueous elastomers, hydrocolloids, and
inelastic materials. Elastomers include polysulfide, condensation
and addition silicone, and polyether. Hydrocolloids are alginate
and agar. Inelastic materials comprise impression compound, plaster of Paris, and zinc oxide–eugenol (ZOE).
They are also classified by mechanism of setting, mechanical properties, and clinical applications. The setting mechanisms of impression
materials can be reversible and irreversible. Reversible materials, such
as agar and impression compound, soften upon heating and retain
the shape when cooled in the oral cavity, with no chemical changes
taking place. Irreversible materials imply that chemical reactions have
occurred during impression making. The set impression materials can
be inelastic (rigid) or elastic. Set rigid materials are highly resistant to
flexure but fracture when deformed. They include ZOE impression
paste, impression plaster, and impression compound. The term elastic
in impression materials means that the material can be flexed easily without fracture and returns to its original form when unstressed.
Hydrocolloids and elastomers fall into this category. The ability of
elastic impression materials to rebound after removal from the mouth
makes them suitable for reproducing both the hard and soft structures of the mouth, including the undercuts and interproximal spaces.
Inelastic impression materials, such as ZOE and plaster, are ideal for
making impressions of edentulous jaw structures or soft tissue because
they do not compress the tissue during seating of the impression tray.
Impression compound is often used to make trays for the construction of full dentures. Table 13-1 shows the classification based on the
setting mechanism and mechanical characteristics.
Environmental conditions and the type of tissue dictate the
choice of materials, the quality of the impression, and the quality
of the cast. The next three sections discuss the unique properties
of three categories of impression materials by composition and
describe how they affect the quality of the impressions and the casts.

Elastomeric Impression Materials

• Figure 13-1 Impressions of dentate (left) and edentulous arches (right)
with the resulting respective gypsum casts.

Elastomeric impression materials are crosslinked polymers when
set that can be stretched and yet rapidly recover to their original
dimensions when stress is released. Chemically, there are three elastomers based on polysulfide, silicone (polysiloxane), and polyether.
A background covering the underlying fundamentals of polymeric
materials is presented in Chapter 2, Polymers.

TABLE 13-1

Classification of Dental Impression
Materials

HS

SH

CHAPTER 13

Auxiliary Materials

HS

SH

SH

HS

277

SH
SH

SH

MECHANICAL CHARACTERISTICS
SH

SH

Setting Mechanism

Inelastic

Elastic

Chemical reaction
(irreversible)

Plaster of Paris
Zinc oxide–eugenol

Alginate
Polysulfide
Polyether
Condensation silicone
Addition silicone

SH

Thermally induced
physical reaction
(reversible)

Impression
compound

Agar

Pb O2

SH

Elastomeric impression materials are supplied in two components,
a base and a catalyst (or accelerator), that are mixed before making impressions. The term catalyst or accelerator used here may be
a misnomer with certain material systems. Reactor is a more appropriate term for the polysulfide and condensation silicone because
they participate in the reaction. In the case of polyether, the catalyst
contains initiators. The materials are often formulated in several
consistencies, including extra low, low, medium, heavy, and putty,
in increasing order of filler content. Extra-low and putty forms are
available only for condensation and addition silicones. Polysulfide
is provided only in light-body and heavy-body consistencies. Pigments are added to give each material a distinct color. As a group
of impression materials, elastomers are classified by consistency
measured immediately after complete mixing as type 0: putty, type
1: heavy-bodied, type 2: medium-bodied, and type 3: light-bodied
(International Organization of Standard ISO 4823:2015).

Polysulfide
The base paste contains a liquid prepolymer with multifunctional mercaptan (–SH) groups, a suitable filler to provide the
consistency for mixing and the required strength when set, a plasticizer to confer the appropriate viscosity for workability of the
paste, and a small quantity of sulfur (~0.5%) to accelerate the
reaction. The catalyst paste contains lead dioxide, filler, and plasticizer, as in the base paste, and oleic or stearic acid as a retarder to
control the rate of the setting reaction. Each paste is supplied in a
dispensing tube with appropriately sized bore diameters at the tip
so that equal lengths of each paste are extruded from each tube to
provide the correct ratio of base to crosslinking agent.
The reaction starts as soon as mixing begins, and a resilient
network has started to form (Figure 13-2). During the final set, a
material of adequate elasticity and strength is formed so that the
impression can be removed past undercuts quite readily. Elevated
temperature and humid conditions will accelerate the setting of
polysulfide impression material. The reaction yields water as a byproduct. Loss of water from the set material has a significant effect
on the dimensional stability of the impression.
Condensation Silicone
The materials are supplied as a base paste and a liquid catalyst, a
two-paste system, or a two-putty system. The putty can be used
as the tray material in conjunction with a low-viscosity silicone,
which is referred to as the putty-wash technique.
The base paste consists of α-ω-hydroxyl-terminated polydimethyl siloxane (Figure 13-3). The curing of this material

Pb O + O

S S

HS

Chemistry of Elastomeric Impression Materials

HS

SH

S

S S
SH

S

S

S
SH

SH

SH

HS
SH

+ H2O

• Figure 13-2 Polymerization of polysulfide impression material. SH groups
interact with oxygen released from lead dioxide (left). Completion of the condensation reaction results in water as a by-product (right). Pendant −SH is
for crosslinking, and terminal −SH is for chain lengthening of the polymer.
involves a reaction of tri- and tetra-functional alkyl silicates in
the presence of stannous octoate as a catalyst. The material sets
by condensation reaction between terminal groups of the silicone
polymers and the alkyl silicate to form a three-dimensional network (Figure 13-3). Ethyl alcohol is a by-product of the condensation reaction that evaporates, and the evaporation accounts for
much of the contraction that occurs during setting.

Addition Silicone
This material is often called a polyvinyl siloxane (PVS) or vinyl
polysiloxane (VPS) impression material. The base paste contains
polymethylhydrosiloxane and other siloxane prepolymers. The
catalyst paste contains divinylpolysiloxane and a platinum salt.
Both pastes contain fillers. The addition silicone is based on addition polymerization between divinylpolysiloxane and polymethylhydrosiloxane with a platinum salt as the catalyst (Figure 13-4).
No reaction by-products are formed if the correct proportions
of base and catalyst pastes are used and there are no impurities.
However, the residual polymethylhydrosiloxane in the material
can lead to a secondary reaction with each other or with moisture,
producing hydrogen gas. Technically, hydrogen gas is a reaction
by-product that does not affect the dimensional stability of the
impression. Nonetheless, the hydrogen gas evolved can result in
pinpoint voids in the gypsum casts poured soon after the removal
of the impression from the mouth. A noble metal, such as palladium, can be added as a scavenger for the released hydrogen
gas. The impression should be left overnight if epoxy is used for
pouring models.
Sulfur contamination from natural latex gloves inhibits the setting of addition silicone. Some vinyl gloves may have the same effect
because of the sulfur-containing stabilizer used in the manufacturing
process. The contamination is so pervasive that touching the tooth
with latex gloves before seating the impression can inhibit the setting
of the critical surface next to the tooth.

278

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

• Figure 13-3 Condensation polymerization of α-ω-hydroxy-terminated poly (dimethyl siloxane) with tetraethyl orthosilicate in the presence of stannous octoate (catalyst). The reaction results in the release of
ethanol molecules.

• Figure 13-4 Polymerization of addition silicone. Hydrogen atoms along the backbone structure of the
vinyl silicone chain move to the vinyl groups during addition polymerization (top). Final structure after the
platinum salt has initiated the addition polymerization reaction (bottom). The zigzag line at the other end of
divinylpolysiloxane represents repeating units of dimethylsiloxane with a vinyl terminal.

Medium-body addition silicone has also been formulated for
making impressions for diagnostic purposes, as a substitute for
alginate impression material, an irreversible hydrocolloid to be
discussed later. The advantage of these so-called alginate substitutes
is the ability to make multiple, accurate diagnostic casts from one
impression. Laboratory studies have reported that they exhibited
better detail reproduction and less variability in linear dimensional
change than alginates.

Polyether
There are two types of polyether impression materials. The first is
based on the ring-opening polymerization of aziridine rings, which
are at the end of branched polyether molecules (Figure 13-5). The
main chain is probably a copolymer of ethylene oxide and tetrahydrofuran. Crosslinking and setting are promoted by an initiator and
an aromatic sulfonate ester, where R is an alkyl group. This produces
crosslinking by cationic polymerization via the imine end groups. The
base paste contains the polyether prepolymer, colloidal silica as filler,
and a plasticizer such as glycol ether or phthalate. The accelerator paste
contains an alkyl-aromatic sulfonate in addition to the filler and plas-

ticizer. The ether-dominated polymer backbones make this group of
materials the most hydrophilic of all elastomeric impression materials.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the steps needed to produce casts and dies for prosthetic procedures?

The second type is based on an acid-catalyzed condensation polymerization (Figure 13-3) of polyether prepolymer with alkoxysilane terminal groups. The mechanism is like that observed in condensation
silicones having low-molecular-weight alcohols as by-products. This
material is often called a hybrid. Because the ether linkages constitute
the main component of the polymer chains, these materials behave
very much like the first type of polyether impression material.

Making Impressions With Elastomeric Materials
The use of elastomeric impression material to fabricate gypsum
models, casts, and dies involves six major steps: (1) preparing a
tray, (2) managing tissue, (3) preparing the material, (4) making

CHAPTER 13

Auxiliary Materials

279

• Figure 13-5 Ring-opening polymerization of polyether. The initiator, aromatic sulfonate ester, dissociates
(top) and forms alkyl cations that bind the nitrogen atoms of the aziridine ring terminals of the prepolymer
(left). The arrows indicate binding between the cations (R+) with the nitrogen atoms. This action opens the
ring, and the reacted prepolymer (center) now has two charged ethylene imine terminals (–NR–CH2–C+H2),
which can react with the nitrogen atoms of adjacent unreacted prepolymers, shown as the R2-aziridine
ring. This chain-propagation polymerization reaction yields a larger molecule (right), which continues growing by binding with the aziridine rings of additional unreacted prepolymers. The polymerization reaction
terminates when the growing chain combines with a counterion.

an impression, (5) removing the impression, and (6) preparing for
stone casts and dies.

Impression Trays
The use of a custom tray (Figure 13-6, left) requires less impression
material than a stock tray to make impressions, thus minimizing
dimensional changes attributable to the materials. A custom tray
allows a uniform distribution of impression material between the
tray and the tissue, which also improves accuracy. This is especially true for polysulfide impression material. The use of custom
trays for polyether and addition silicone impressions is not critical because these materials are stiffer and have less polymerization shrinkage than polysulfide. In addition, disposable stock
trays (Figure 13-6, right) work satisfactorily. Note that the use of
less material in a custom tray reduces the compressibility of the

• Figure 13-6 Impression trays. Custom tray (left) and stock tray (right).

280

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

impression, which can make removal of the impression tray more
difficult. When severe undercuts are present, the use of a custom
tray should be avoided. The stock tray should be rigid, thereby
minimizing flexure of the tray during impression removal. Prior
to making an impression, a uniform thickness of tray adhesive is
applied on the tray surface, extending over its edge, and allowed
to dry (through evaporation of solvent). Tray adhesives are not
interchangeable among different types of materials.

Tissue Management
The margins of tooth preparations for fixed prostheses often extend
to or below the free margin of the gingiva. To ensure access for the
tooth preparation and for making the impression, displacing the
gingival tissues is necessary to control gingival hemorrhage and
sulcular fluids from distorting the margins of the crown preparation. Among the most popular methods of gingival displacement
is the use of gingival retraction cord. An electrosurgical unit or a
soft tissue laser can also be used.
Placing a retraction cord displaces the gingival tissue laterally
away from the margin of the preparation. One or two gingival
retraction cords are placed under the margin around the tooth for
at least 5 minutes before making impressions. The double-cord
technique is used when the margin is very close to the gingival
attachment. A fine cord is placed at the base of the crevice to

facilitate moisture control, with a larger cord placed on top of the
first and near the coronal extent to displace the gingiva laterally.
The outermost cord is removed, leaving the fine cord within the
crevice while the impression is made. A single cord is sufficient
to deflect the soft tissue around the margin when the preparation
margin is at or slightly above the gingival crest.
Retraction cords may be impregnated with a hemostatic agent
by dipping the cord in a hemostatic solution prior to placement.
These agents can have unintended side effects and should be used
with caution. For example, epinephrine, which is used widely, is
of concern in patients with cardiovascular disease. In addition,
agents with a low pH can remove the smear layer and superficial
dentin apical to the margins of the preparation, possibly leading
to postoperative sensitivity of some teeth.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does static mixing achieve a uniform mixture? What is the main
difference between static mixing and dynamic mixing?

Manipulation of Impression Materials
Currently, elastomeric impression materials are offered for three
modes of mixing: hand mixing, static mixing, and dynamic
mechanical mixing (Figure 13-7).

• Figure 13-7 Mixing systems. A, Hand mixing. Two equal lengths of the material are dispensed on the
mixing pad with the mixing spatula. B, Static mixing. When the trigger is pulled, the plunger is driven
forward (to the left) so that the base and catalyst pastes are forced from the cartridge into the mixing tip
(extreme left). The pastes pass through the bore and exit the nozzle as a uniform mixed paste. Four different sizes of mixing tips are shown; the more viscous the material, the larger is the mixing tip that should
be used. Syringe tips can be fit to the nozzle to deliver the mixed paste directly to the prepared teeth.
C, Static mixing syringe. These syringes fit the cartridge, such as the mixing tips shown in (B). The base
and catalyst are first injected into the respective barrel. A plunger then forces the material through a smaller
static mixing tip. It can deliver the light-body material directly onto the abutment(s). D, Dynamic mechanical
mixing. The motor-driving mechanism forces the material into the mixing tip and makes the impeller (insert)
inside the tip rotate. The function of the impeller is only to mix the material.

CHAPTER 13

Hand Mixing

The user dispenses the same lengths of materials onto a mixing pad
(Figure 13-7, A). The catalyst paste is first collected on a stainlesssteel spatula and then spread over the base paste. The mixture is
spread over the mixing pad. The mass is then scraped up with the
spatula blade and spread uniformly back and forth on the mixing
pad. This process continues until the mixed paste is uniform in
color, with no streaks of the base or catalyst appearing in the mixture. If one of the components is in liquid form, such as the catalyst
for condensation silicones, a length of the base is dispensed from the
tube onto a graduated mixing pad, and drops of the liquid catalyst
corresponding to the length of the base are added.
The two-putty systems available for condensation and addition
silicone are dispensed by volume using an equal number of scoops
of each material. The best mixing technique is to knead the material with one’s gloved fingers until a uniform color is obtained.
Static Mixing

This technique transforms two flowable (or paste-like) materials
into a homogeneous mixture without mechanical mixing. The
device comprises a gun for pushing materials in a two-cylinder cartridge (base and catalyst), along with a mixing tip (Figure 13-7, B).
The mixing tip is made of helical mixer elements in a cylindrical
housing (Figure 13-8). The mixer elements are a series of alternating right- and left-turn 180° helixes positioned so that the leading
edge of one element is perpendicular to the trailing edge of the
other one (Figure 13-8, B).
The base and catalyst are pressed from the cartridge into the mixing tip as one stream of a two-layer material. The leading edge of the
first element splits the material entering the mixer into two streams.
The streams that flow on either side of the helix will make a 180° turn
(Figure 13-8, A) when they reach the second element. Both streams
are split by the leading edge of the second element and become two
streams of four-layer material (two layers from each original stream)

A

Auxiliary Materials

281

entering the third element. This process is known as flow division.
Even if there is no intermixing between layers as they merge to a new
stream, there will be 2n layers in either stream as they come out of the
nth element. For a mixing tip with 11 elements, the stream that exits
the mixing tip will have a 2048-striation structure, which is practically
a uniformly mixed stream of material. In addition, as the materials
make turns along the helix, the rotational circulation causes a radial
mixing of the materials. Thus mixing between layers occurs before the
subsequent flow division that further increases the uniformity of the
mixture. Because there is no mechanical mixing, porosity caused by
mixing with air is avoided.
The mixed impression material is injected directly into the
adhesive-coated tray or, if the “syringe tip” is in place, onto the prepared teeth. One can also use an intraoral syringe (Figure 13-7, C) to
apply light-body material onto prepared teeth. One precaution that
should be taken is to make sure that the openings of the cartridges
that dispense the pastes remain unclogged. Problems can be avoided
if one expresses a small amount of material from the cartridge before
attaching the mixing tip and discards the first centimeter of mixture
that emerges from the mixing tip. This process is called bleeding. This
type of device has also been adapted to mix and dispense acrylicbased materials for fabricating temporary crown and bridge, and luting cements that are used for luting prostheses (Chapter 7, Clinical
Manipulation and Evaluation).
Dynamic Mechanical Mixing

The device shown in Figure 13-7, D uses a motor to drive parallel
plungers, forcing the materials into a mixing tip and out into an
impression tray or syringe; meanwhile, the motor-driven impeller, which is inside the mixing tip, mixes the materials as they are
extruded through the tip. The function of the impeller is only to mix
the materials as they are passing through; it does not propel the material. The materials are supplied in collapsible plastic bags housed in a
cartridge. The amount of material retained in the mixing tip is slightly
greater than that used in static mixing. In using this device, thorough
mixing of higher-viscosity materials can be achieved with little effort.
Both polyether and addition silicone impression materials of various
viscosities are available with this dispensing system.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does each impression-making technique take advantage of the unique
properties of the impression materials?

C

Techniques of Making Impressions
Elastomeric impression materials are typically supplied in several
viscosities to accommodate the different techniques for impression making. Three techniques for making impressions are discussed in this section.

• Figure 13-8 Design of a static mixing tip. A, Mechanism of mixing in

Multiple-Mix Technique

B

a two-element model. The two-element model shows that the materials
injected into a left-turn helix are immediately split into two streams. Both
streams make a 180° counterclockwise turn when they reach the leading
edge of the next element, a right-turn helix. Each stream is split as it enters
the new element. Two new streams, made of combining two substreams,
one from each original stream, now make a 180° clockwise turn when they
reach the trailing edge of the element. When there is a third element present,
each substream will be split again, and the total number of substreams will
be eight (23). B, Mixer elements with 11 helixes. The double-headed arrow
delineates the size of one element. The appearance of a size difference between neighboring elements is caused by the orientation. C, Mixing tip with
encased mixer elements. (Courtesy Dr. Karl-Johan Söderholm.)

A syringe material (light body) and a tray material (heavy body)
are used in this technique. When they are hand mixed, they are
mixed simultaneously, each by a different person because one must
load the syringe with the light-body material. With mechanical
devices, the materials can be mixed as needed by one individual.
The lighter material is dispensed from the filled syringe or directly
from a static mixing gun within and around the tooth preparation. The filled tray is then inserted in the mouth and seated over
the syringe material. The tray material will force the syringe material to adapt to the prepared tissues. The two materials should
bond together upon setting. If either material has progressed past

282

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Shorter,
narrower die

D
Force on partially
set material

Compression of
impression

Elastic
recovery

A

B

C

• Figure 13-9 Effect of seating-tray material that has passed its working time and developed some elasticity. A, Impression tray containing elastomeric impression material is seated too late as elasticity starts
to develop. B, Increased seating pressure is applied to overcome the stiffness of impression material. C,
Distortion develops during the recovery of excessive elastic deformation (springback). D, The die produced
in the inaccurate impression is too narrow and too short.

the working time when brought together, the bond between them
will be compromised. If a partially set material is seated, the material will be compressed elastically. Once removed from the mouth,
the impression will “spring back” or relax, and the dies made from
this impression will be too narrow and too short, as illustrated in
Figure 13-9.
In rare cases a clinician may attempt to repair an impression
that has small defects or that lacks sufficient detail. This is usually performed by cutting away the interproximal and gingival
areas of the impression. Reseating the tray precisely will be difficult even with proper relief of the initial impression. Entrapment of a minute fragment of impression material or debris
will eliminate any chance of a successful repair. The impression material’s surface must be roughened to ensure that the
new material bonds to the set impression. The safest method is
to make a new impression when bubbles or similar defects are
detected in critical areas.
Monophase Technique

Medium-body polyether and addition silicone are often used
for the monophase or single-viscosity technique. The procedure
is like that of the multiple-mix technique except that only one
mixture is made, and part of the material is placed in the tray,
and another portion is placed in the syringe for injection in the
cavity preparation, prepared teeth, or soft tissue. The success of
this technique depends on the pseudoplastic (shear-thinning)
properties of the materials. When a medium-viscosity material is forced through the syringe tip, the viscosity is reduced,
facilitating material adaptation to the preparation. Meanwhile,
the material in the tray retains a medium viscosity, and when
seated, the tray material can force the syringe material to flow
past critical areas of the tooth preparation. Table 13-2 shows the
effect of shear rate and elapsed time on some monophase addition silicones.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the consequences of placing an impression material in the mouth
after the working time has expired?

Putty-Wash Technique

The thick putty material is placed in a stock tray, and a preliminary
impression is made. This procedure results in what is essentially
an intraoral custom-made tray formed by the putty. Space for the
light-body “wash” material is provided either by cutting away some
of the “tray” putty or by using a thin polyethylene sheet as a spacer
between the putty and the prepared teeth during preliminary
impression making. A mixture of the thin-consistency wash material is placed into the putty impression and on the preparation;
then the tray is reseated in the mouth to make the final impression.

Removal of the Impression
Under no circumstances should the impression be removed
until the curing has progressed sufficiently to provide adequate
elasticity. One method for determining the time of removal is
to inject some of the syringe material onto a space that is not
in the field of operation before inserting the impression tray.
This material can be probed with a blunt instrument from time
to time; when the material is firm and returns completely to
the original contour, the impression is sufficiently elastic to be
removed. Typically, the impression should be ready for removal
within at least 10 minutes from the time of mixing, allowing 6
to 8 minutes for the impression to remain in the mouth. Manufacturers usually provide instructions as to the optimal time for
removal after mixing.
The mechanics of removing the impression involve separation
at the impression–tissue interface and stretching of the impression.
The first step is to break the physical adhesion between the tissue and the impression; therefore an impression material, such as
polyether, that wets the tissue well will require extra effort to break
the adhesion (seal) for the removal. The second step is stretching
the impression enough to pass under the height of contour of the
hard tissue to remove the impression; therefore using a material
of higher rigidity will require a greater force to stretch the impression to facilitate removal. Polysulfide has the lowest viscosity and
ranks as the least stiff of the elastomeric impression materials of
a similar consistency. This flexibility allows the set material to be
easily removed from undercut areas and from the mouth with a
minimum of stress.

CHAPTER 13

Auxiliary Materials

283

TABLE 13-2 Viscosity (×104 cp) of Single-Phase Vinyl Polysiloxanes at 37 °C

VISCOSITY AT 1 min
Material

2.5 rpm

0.5 rpm

2.5 rpm

Baysilex (Miles)

*

122.1 (2.8)

68.9 (2.5)

211.2 (14.7)

148.8 (1.2)

Green-Mouse (Parkell)

133.7 (8.9)

56.7 (2.9)

247.9 (14.9)

78.0 (2.8)

Hydrosil (Caulk)

194.2 (8.5)

129.4 (4.1)

398.1 (7.8)

153.5†

Imprint (3M)

106.5 (12.2)

79.7 (2.2)

245.1 (8.9)

146.2 (5.9)

Omnisil (Coe)

156.8 (11.5)

102.5 (1.9)

347.1 (5.2)

153.5‡

*

0.5 rpm

VISCOSITY AT 1.5 min

Numbers within parentheses represent the standard deviation of the mean.

†

Value at 75 seconds after mixing.

‡

Value at 77 seconds after mixing.

From Kim K-N, Craig RG, Koran A: Viscosity of monophase addition silicones as a function of shear rate, J Prosthet Dent 67:794, 1992.

In addition, all elastomeric impression materials are viscoelastic, and it is necessary to use a quick snap to minimize plastic
deformation of the impression during the final step of the removal
process. The phenomenon of viscoelastic behavior is discussed in
subsequent sections.

Preparation of Stone Casts and Dies
The hydrophobic characteristics of silicone impression make
pouring with gypsum products challenging because it increases
the potential of forming voids in gypsum dies and casts. One can
spray a thin layer of surfactant, also known as debubblizer, on the
impression to improve the surface wettability for the stone mixture. A dilute solution of soap is also an effective surfactant. One
can also select a hydrophilized addition silicone (discussed later)
to make impressions. Pouring of a stone cast in a polyether or
polysulfide impression does not require the aid of a surfactant.
The excellent dimensional stability of addition silicone and
polyether impression materials makes the construction of two or
three casts or dies from one impression possible. It is also possible
to construct successive stone dies or casts from polysulfide impressions when duplicate stone dies are needed. It should be noted that
each successive die will be less accurate than the first die constructed
from the impression. One should wait before the next pour after the
removal of the cast but not greater than 30 minutes. To minimize
tearing and gross distortion after the first pour, the clinician should
remove the excess gypsum-forming mass from undercut areas along
the periphery of the tray. Be aware that the stiffness of the impression material makes it difficult to remove the stone cast from the
impression. A weak stone cast may fracture during removal.

Properties of Elastomeric Impression Materials
The ability to make a cast or die that reproduces the surface details
and precise shape of the original tissue depends on various properties of the impression material. In this section, the properties
relevant to impression making with elastomers are described. The
comparative properties of elastomeric impression materials are
listed in Table 13-3.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is it not advisable to alter the base/catalyst (accelerator) ratio as a
means of controlling working or setting time?

Working and Setting Times
The working time begins at the start of mixing and ends just
before the elastic properties develop. The setting time is the
time elapsed from the beginning of mixing until the material has
enough strength to be removed from the mouth without distortion. Remember, however, that polymerization may continue for
a considerable time after. An increase in temperature accelerates
the rate of polymerization of all elastomeric impression materials;
therefore the effect of temperature on working and setting time
should be taken into consideration.
Altering the base/catalyst ratio will change the curing rate of
these materials. Normally, having more base materials in the mixture tends to increase the working and setting times. Keep in mind
that altering the base/catalyst ratio may not produce a predictable
change in the polymerization rate.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is rapid seating of an impression tray not advisable for a pseudoplastic
impression material?

Rheological Properties
Ideally, the impression material should flow freely and wet the tissue
as it is being injected to achieve adaptation, then become immobilized immediately, which keeps the material from flowing away
from the intended surface areas. The same property will facilitate
spreading of heavy-body material on the impression tray and retain
it in the tray. This phenomenon is called shear thinning, which was
discussed in Chapter 3, Rheology. All elastomeric impression materials exhibit shear-thinning characteristics before setting.
There are two categories of shear thinning: pseudoplasticity
and thixotropy. A pseudoplastic material displays decreasing viscosity with increasing shear stress and recovers its viscosity immediately upon termination of shear stress. A thixotropic material
does not exhibit a reduction of viscosity until sufficient agitation
(shear stress) is applied to overcome the yield stress of the material. After the termination of shear stress, it takes a specific time
to regain its previous viscous state. The latter is important because
it takes time for the impression material to adapt to the surface.
Manufacturers often emphasize their materials as being thixotropic and also note that the materials exhibit no slump when
injected on a vertical surface. They usually do not mention the
duration of the time delay.

284

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

TABLE 13-3 Comparative Properties of Elastomeric Impression Materials

Property

Polysulfide

Condensation Silicone

Addition Silicone

Polyether

Working time (min)

4–7

2.5–4

2–4

3

Setting time (min)

7–10

6–8

4–6.5

6

Tear strength (N/m)

2500–7000

2300–2600

1500–4300

1800–4800

Percent contraction (at 24 h)

0.40–0.45

0.38–0.60

0.14–0.17

0.19–0.24

Contact angle between set material and water (°)

82

98

98/53*

49

Hydrogen gas evolution (Y/N)

N

N

Y†

N

Automatic mixing (Y/N)

N

N

Y

Y

Custom tray (Y/N)

Y

N

N

N

Unpleasant odor (Y/N)

Y

N

N

N

N

N

Y

Y

Stiffness (value of 1 indicates greatest stiffness)

3

2 (1)

2 (1)

1 (2)

Distortion on removal (value of 1 indicates the
greatest and 4 the least potential distortion)

1

2

4

3

Multiple casts (Y/N)
‡

N, no; Y, yes, Y/N, yes or no.
*

The lower contact angle resulted from testing of a hydrophilized polyvinyl siloxane (PVS).

†

A hydrogen absorber is often included to eliminate hydrogen gas evolution.

‡

The numbers in the parentheses reflect the ranking when a soft formulation of polyether impression material is considered.

The benefit of thixotropy in impression making has been disputed because the time duration needed for the impression material
to recover the necessary viscosity may be unacceptable. However,
reports suggest that a thixotropic material should facilitate handling and make better impressions. One should be aware that these
studies are often conducted with unmixed base and catalyst pastes.
From the point of impression making, the viscosity of a uniformly
mixed impression also increases with polymerization, regardless of
the effect of thixotropy. Therefore the impact of thixotropy during
impression making may not be critical. In addition, confirming
the thixotropic nature of a material without reporting the time lag
required before regaining the intrinsic viscosity is not meaningful.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the viscoelastic property of impression materials dictate the way
an impression must be removed from a patient’s mouth?

Elasticity and Viscoelasticity
An impression material sustains some deformation as it is removed
from the mouth, but it must rebound to its preremoval dimensions to preserve the dimensions of the preparation. All elastomeric
impression materials are viscoelastic and exhibit both viscous and
elastic characteristics. Recall that viscous materials, such as honey,
resist shear flow but continue to flow as long as stress is applied.
Elastic materials strain (deform) when a stress is applied, but the
strain does not increase with time if no additional stress is applied,
and they immediately return to their original state once the stress is
removed. Essentially, viscoelastic materials exhibit time-dependent
strain. Thus, under a constant stress (load), the straining process
takes time to complete, and after the load is lifted, the recovery
process also takes time and allows a certain degree of plastic (nonrecoverable) deformation to take place. In addition, the amount
of deformation is related to the duration of loading. Therefore an

impression may sustain deformation after being subjected to various forces during removal and then, in time, recovers most of the
deformation after it is allowed to rest. This explains why removal of
the impression should be done quickly (in a “snap”) if possible, and
prolonged teasing or rocking should be avoided.
Polyvinyl siloxane impression materials exhibit the most elastic recovery of the currently available materials. Distortion on
removal from undercuts is virtually nonexistent. However, the
excellent elastic properties present a problem in that the heavybody putty material begins to acquire elastic properties while it
is still in the working-time stage. If the material is at an advanced
stage of elasticity and is compressed excessively during the seating
of the impression, distortion can occur when the material elastically rebounds (Figure 13-9).
The difficulty of removing earlier generations of polyether impressions from undercut areas is attributed to their high modulus of elasticity. The new generations of polyether impression materials, with
a stiffness lower than that of hydrophilic PVS, were formulated specifically to address stiffness concerns. However, the inherent hydrophilicity of these polyethers has resulted in greater adhesion between
the tissue and the material, which still makes impression removal
difficult. It is important to note that increased precision also implies
greater adaptation and resultant adhesion between the impression and the tissue, especially the teeth, and increased difficulty of
removing the impression. Because of the reduced rigidity, these new
generations of polyether impression material may not be the material of choice for the “triple-tray” technique, where the impression
material’s stiffness during removal compensates for the flexibility of
the tray. Although these new polyether impression materials are flexible during removal, they have been shown to increase their elastic
moduli for some time after removal. As the formulation of impression materials continues to evolve to accommodate specific needs,
grouping the stiffness of impression materials based on the backbone
of polymer chains is becoming less meaningful.

CHAPTER 13

• Figure 13-10 A, A properly retracted soft tissue will leave a narrow
space to be filled by the light-viscosity impression material. B, The impression material has torn during removal.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What is the difference between tear strength and tear energy? Why is tear
energy more meaningful for impression making?

t

Auxiliary Materials

Tear Strength
The subgingival regions of the impression are often very thin and
can tear during impression removal, leaving a portion embedded
within the gingival sulcus (Figure 13-10). The tear strength is
influenced by consistency and the manner of removing the materials. A heavier consistency usually increases the tear strength of the
material. The addition of a thinning agent to the mixture reduces
the tear strength slightly but increases the flexibility substantially.
A quick snap in removing the impression usually increases the tear
strength because the action increases the resistance of the material
to deformation (strain).
Tear strength measures the resistance of an elastomeric material
to fracture when subjected to a tensile force acting perpendicular to a surface flaw. Figure 13-11 shows two specimen designs
that have been used by the dental community for testing impression materials. The amount of force needed to tear a specified test
specimen, divided by the thickness of the specimen, is called the
tear strength. Note that the calculation of tear strength disregards
the dimensional change for the test specimen. For the same tooth
preparation, a material that can be stretched a great deal elastically
before fracture will likely remain intact, whereas a rigid material
can fracture at a much lower tensile strain at a higher level of force.
The latter will appear to have higher tear strength but is more
likely to fracture than the former. Thus the use of tear strength
to distinguish the resistance of an impression material to tearing
is not very meaningful. The property that can delineate the combined behavior of stress and strain is energy (Chapter 4, Resilience
and Toughness), which includes the dimensional change of the

t

A

Force (F)

Tear strength =

B

285

Tear energy =

F
t
F (1+ )
t

Distance (mm)

• Figure 13-11 A, Two configurations of tear-strength test specimens: right-angle design (left) and trouser
design configuration (right). B, Force–distance curve of a typical tear test and calculation of tear strength
and tear energy. The plateau of the curve (dotted line) indicates the force (F) needed for initiation and propagation of the crack. The thickness of the specimen is t, and the extension ratio is λ, which equals the extended portion of the specimen length at the end of the test divided by the original length of the specimen.

286

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

material in the calculation. The tear energy is determined by the
force (F) needed to keep the crack propagating, the thickness of
the specimen (t) and the extension ratio (λ). The extension ratio
is the extended portion of the length (Δl) at the end of the test
divided by the original length of the specimen (l) (Figure 13-11).
The calculated value also has the units of N/m, which can be converted to N⋅m/m2 and then J/m2, an expression of energy per unit
area.
Polysulfide materials have the highest resistance to tearing.
Therefore thin sections of polysulfide impression material are
less likely to tear than polyether or silicone impression materials of a similar thickness. However, because of their susceptibility to permanent distortion, polysulfide impressions may distort
rather than tear. This presents a problem because tearing can be
seen immediately by carefully checking the impression, whereas
distortion is difficult to detect by visual inspection. Because the
strain rate influences tear resistance and permanent deformation,
the impression should be strained rapidly for as short a time as
possible to minimize adverse effects.

do not have to be poured with a gypsum product immediately.
Research has shown that pouring between 24 hours and 1 week
produced casts as accurate as those made in the first hour. Multiple
pouring of the impressions and removal of the casts will not alter the
dimensional stability of the impression, even though a substantial
force is needed each time a cast is removed from the impression.
One variable that can have a negative effect on the polyether
impression is the absorption of water or fluids and the simultaneous leaching of the water-soluble plasticizer during disinfectant
immersion longer than 10 minutes. However, recent research has
shown that 30-minute immersion does not have a negative effect
on the dimensions. Nonetheless, the polyether impression should
be stored in a dry (relative humidity below 50%), cool environment to maintain its accuracy and should never be left for protracted periods in disinfecting solutions.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are hydrophilic materials potentially more susceptible to distortion
during disinfection prior to being poured with a gypsum-forming product?

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the main causes of impression inaccuracy?

Dimensional Stability
Dimensional stability refers to the lack of dimensional changes of the
impression over time. There are six major sources of dimensional
change: (1) polymerization shrinkage, (2) loss of a condensation
reaction by-products (water or alcohol), (3) thermal contraction
from oral temperature to room temperature, (4) absorption of
water or disinfectant over a period of time, (5) incomplete recovery of deformation because of viscoelastic behavior, and (6) incomplete recovery because of plastic deformation. Figure 13-12 shows
the mean linear contraction for four elastomers using the method
described in American National Standards Institute American Dental Association (ANSI/ADA) Specification No. 19 and ISO 4823.
Figure 13-12 shows that if maximal accuracy is to be maintained, the slurry mix for a stone die or cast should be poured within
the first 30 minutes after the polysulfide and condensation silicone
impression are removed from the mouth. The stability of the addition silicone and polyether materials suggests that these impressions

Linear contraction (%)

0.8

Condensation silicone

0.7
0.6
Polysulfide

0.5
0.4

Polyether

0.3
Addition silicone

0.2
0.1
0

6

12
Time (h)

18

24

• Figure 13-12 Representative linear contraction of four elastomeric impression materials.

Disinfection
All elastomeric impression materials can be disinfected with all
disinfectants registered with the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) without the loss of surface quality or accuracy if the
disinfection time is short. The impressions should be immersed
for the time specified for each disinfectant, as discussed in the
last section. After disinfection, the impression should be removed,
rinsed, and poured with the gypsum product as soon as possible.
Table 13-4 shows a guide for selecting appropriate disinfection
methods for all types of impressions that are subsequently transferred to a dental laboratory.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the surfactant added to hydrophilize PVS affect the contact angle
of water droplets during the setting and pouring of casts with gypsum?

Wettability of Impression Materials and Hydrophilization
of PVS
The contact angles of distilled water on set silicone impressions are
approximately 100°, which makes this group of materials the most
hydrophobic among all elastomeric impression materials. The use
of a more hydrophobic impression material may lead to a high
frequency of voids in the cast. It is possible to spray a surfactant
on these hydrophobic impressions prior to pouring with gypsum
mixtures. A nonionic surfactant may be added to the bulk of the
PVS during the manufacturing process, and the resultant material
is called a hydrophilized PVS.
In vitro studies of the surface wettability of set impressions
typically use distilled water as the probing liquid. The results confirm that there are significant reductions in the contact angles of
hydrophilized PVS relative to their nonhydrophilized counterparts. The use of an aqueous solution saturated with CaSO4 yields
similar results. Examination of stone casts confirms that elastomers, which exhibit the least contact angle with water, also produce stone casts with fewer voids.
The use of optical tensiometry, which analyzes the shape of
liquid drops on the surface using a video image, allows observation of the contact angles of water droplets on freshly mixed
impression materials in real time. Numerous studies have reported
a decrease in water contact angles on silicones, hydrophilized PVS,

CHAPTER 13

Auxiliary Materials

287

TABLE 13-4 Guide for the Selection of Appropriate Disinfection Methods for Impressions Transported to a

Dental Laboratory
Material

Method

Recommended Disinfectant

Comments

Alginate

Immersion with caution
Use only disinfectant for a short-term
exposure time (<10 min for alginate)

Chlorine compounds or iodophors

Short-term glutaraldehyde has been shown
to be acceptable, but time is inadequate for
disinfection.

Agar

Do not immerse in alkaline glutaraldehyde!

Polysulfide and
silicone

Immersion

Glutaraldehydes, chlorine compounds,
iodophors, phenolics

Disinfectants requiring more than 30-min
exposure times are not recommended.

Polyether

Immerse with cautionUse disinfectant
only for a short exposure time (<10 min)

Chlorine compounds or iodophors

ADA recommends any of the disinfectant
classes; however, short-term exposures
are essential to avoid distortion.

ZOE impression
paste

Immersion preferred; spraying can be
used for bite registrations

Glutaraldehydes or iodophors

Not compatible with chlorine compounds!
Phenolic spray can be used.

ADA, American Dental Association; ZOE, zinc oxide–eugenol.

and polyethers over the setting period. This decrease can be as
much as 70° for hydrophilized PVS and less for polyether. Chemical analyses of water droplets show that they all acquire substances
from their respective impression materials. For hydrophilized
PVS, the water droplets absorb a sufficient quantity of surfactant
and become a liquid of lower surface tension. The lowering of surface tension makes water droplets spread wider on the surface of
PVS, yielding lower contact angles. This observation leads to the
hypothesis that hydrophilicity of the PVS does not change much,
but the acquired surfactant has reduced the surface tension of the
probing water, making it readily spread over the PVS. Some clinical observations seem to support this hypothesis because there is
no difference between nonhydrophilized and hydrophilized PVS
with respect to the reproducibility of detail on wet surfaces. However, another clinical study reports that hydrophilized PVS yields
a significantly higher proportion of void-free impressions than
its nonhydrophilized counterpart. For polyethers, the substances
acquired by the water droplets represent a low-molecular-weight
compound associated with polyethers, and their effect on the surface tension of the water droplet is small. Thus a smaller decrease
in the contact angle is observed.
As soon as hydrophilized PVS encounters oral fluids during
impression making, it begins to release surfactant to its surroundings. It is known that there is an adequate amount of surfactant
trapped on the surface of set PVS impressions, thereby providing hydrophilicity for the pouring of gypsum dies. Whereas one
might believe that the decrease of contact angle over the period of
setting is equivalent to good wetting of the impression material
on moist tooth surfaces, the clinical relevance remains unclear for
two reasons. First, the decrease in contact angle may be attributed
mainly to the lowering of the surface tension of the water droplets by the surfactant, so the actual improvement in the hydrophilicity of the impression may be much less significant than it
appears. Second, there are conflicting clinical observations. This
conflict is not surprising when one realizes that some materials
contain very hydrophilic surfactants that are readily leached from
the surface, whereas others contain surfactants that are balanced
in their hydrophilic and lipophilic properties so that the lipophilic
end remains buried near the surface while the hydrophilic chain
is exposed on the surface. In the latter case, very little leaching
occurs.

Effect of Mishandling
The failure to produce an accurate epoxy or gypsum die or cast is
more likely associated with an error in handling rather than a deficiency in the properties of the impression material. The common
failures experienced with impression materials and their causes are
summarized in Table 13-5. A summary of the characteristics of the
elastomeric impression materials is given in Table 13-6.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the difference between a solution and a hydrocolloid?

Hydrocolloids
A colloid is a substance that is microscopically dispersed uniformly throughout another medium. This is different from a solution, as defined in Chapter 2, Solutes and Solvents. A solution is
a single phase, whereas a colloidal system consists of the dispersed
phase and the dispersion phase. If the dispersion phase of a colloidal system is water, it is called a hydrocolloid. The sizes of the
colloid particles range from 1 to 200 nm.
Success in impression making depends on the transformation
from a flowable state to a solid elastomeric state. This change of state
with hydrocolloids is called the sol–gel transformation. A sol is a colloidal dispersion in a continuous liquid medium, and a gel is a suspension that behaves like an elastic solid. If a hydrocolloid contains
an adequate concentration of the dispersed phase, the sol, under certain conditions, may change to a gel. In the gel state, the dispersed
phase forms agglomerates in the form of chains or fibrils, also called
micelles. The fibrils may branch and intermesh to form a brush-heap
structure, which can be envisioned as resembling the intermeshing of
tree branches or twigs in a brush pile. The dispersion medium is held
in the interstices between the fibrils by capillary attraction or adhesion. In this section, the characteristics of the two hydrocolloids used
for impression making, agar and alginate, are described.

Agar (Reversible Hydrocolloid)
The sol–gel transformation of agar is a physical phenomenon
induced by temperature change. The gel liquefies when it is heated
to 70 to 100 °C, which is known as the liquefaction temperature,

288

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

TABLE 13-5 Common Failures Occurring With the Use of Elastomeric Impression Materials

Type of Failure

Causes

Rough or uneven impression
surface

Incomplete polymerization caused by premature removal from the mouth, improper ratio or mixing of components, or
presence of oil or other organic material, such as plaque, on the teeth
For addition silicone, surface agents, such as latex, that contaminate the material and inhibit polymerization
Too rapid polymerization from high humidity or temperature
Excessively high accelerator/base ratio with condensation silicone

Bubbles

Air incorporated during hand mixing

Irregularly shaped voids

Moisture or debris on surface of teeth

Rough or chalky stone cast

Inadequate cleaning of impression
Excess water that is not blown off the impression
Excess wetting agent left on impression
Premature removal of cast; improper powder/water ratio of stone
Failure to delay pour of addition silicone that does not contain a palladium salt for at least 20 min

Distortion

Resin tray not aged sufficiently; still undergoing polymerization shrinkage
Lack of adhesion of elastomer to the tray caused by not applying enough coats of adhesive, filling tray with material too
soon after applying adhesive, or using incorrect adhesive
Lack of mechanical retention to the impression tray
Excessive bulk of material
Insufficient relief for the reline material (if such technique is used)
Development of elastic properties in the material before tray is fully seated
Continued pressure against impression material that has developed elastic properties
Movement of tray during polymerization
Premature removal of impression from mouth
Improper removal of impression from mouth
Delayed pouring of the polysulfide or condensation silicone impression

TABLE 13-6 Characteristics of Elastomeric Impression Materials

Generic Type

Advantages

Disadvantages

Polysulfide

Long working time
High tear resistance
Margins easily seen
Moderate cost

Requires custom tray
Stretching leads to distortion
Compatible with stone
Stains clothing
Obnoxious odor
Pour within 1 h

Condensation silicone (putty wash)

Putty for custom tray
Clean and pleasant
Good working time
Margins easily seen

High polymerization shrinkage
Volatile by-product
Low tear strength
Hydrophobic
Pour immediately

Vinyl polysiloxane

One material
Putty for custom tray
Automix dispense
Clean and pleasant
Margins easily seen
Ideally elastic
Pour repeatedly
Stable; delay pour

Hydrophobic
No flow if sulcus is moist
Low tear strength
Putty displaces wash
Wash has low tear strength
Putty too stiff
Putty and wash separate
Difficult to pour cast

Polyether

Fast-setting
Clean
Automix dispense
Least hydrophobic of all elastomers
Margins easily seen
Good stability
Delay pour
Shelf life: 2 y

Stiff, high modulus
Bitter taste
Need to block undercuts
Absorbs water
Leaches components
High cost

CHAPTER 13

Auxiliary Materials

289

TABLE 13-6 Characteristics of Elastomeric Impression Materials—cont’d

Generic Type

Advantages

Disadvantages

Agar

Moist field OK
Accurate and pleasant
Hydrophilic
Low cost
Long shelf-life

Requires special equipment
Thermal discomfort
Tears easily
Pour immediately
Difficult to see margins and details

Alginate

Moist field OK
Clean and pleasant
Hydrophilic
Low cost
Long shelf-life

Not accurate/rough
Tears easily
Pour immediately
Can retard setting of gypsum

and the sol solidifies around 37 to 50 °C, which is known as the
gelation temperature. Thus agar is called a reversible hydrocolloid.
The gelation temperature is critical for impression making. If it is
too high, the heat from the sol may injure the oral tissues. Conversely, if the gelation temperature is too far below oral temperature, it will be impossible to make the impression because the sol
will not convert to a gel in the oral cavity.

Composition
Agar, a polysaccharide, is the main active ingredient in the material, whereas water is the major constituent in the agar impression material. Various fillers—such as borax, diatomaceous earth,
clay, silica, wax, rubber, and similar inert powders—are used to
control strength, viscosity, and rigidity, as previously discussed
for elastomeric impression materials. Thymol and glycerin may
also be added as a bactericidal agent and plasticizer, respectively.
Pigments and flavors are usually included as well. The hydrocolloid is usually supplied in two forms, syringe material and tray
material.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the purpose of having three water tanks set at three different
temperatures in a conditioning unit for agar impression materials?

Making Agar Impression
This process requires a three-compartment conditioning unit
(Figure 13-13) for the agar tray material that allows liquefaction,
storage, and tempering; the agar syringe material is used only in
the liquefaction and storage compartments.
The first step in impression making is to liquefy the hydrocolloid gel in the tube in boiling water at 100 °C. The tube is then
placed in a storage bath at 65 °C to retain the sol condition until it
is needed. For the immediate preparation step, the impression tray
is filled with hydrocolloid sol from the tube taken from the storage
bath, a gauze pad is placed over the top of the tray material, and
the tray is placed in the tempering compartment (at about 45 °C).
The tempering time is 3 to 10 minutes, just sufficient to ensure
that all the material has reached a low temperature of 55 °C or less.
In any case, the loaded tray should never be left in this bath for
more than 10 minutes because partial gelation can occur, thereby
making the material unusable.
Just before tempering of the tray material is completed, the syringe
material is taken directly from the storage compartment and applied
to the prepared teeth. The syringe material is never tempered because
it must be maintained in a fluid state to enhance adaptation to the

• Figure 13-13 Conditioning unit for agar impression materials. The three
compartments are used for liquefying the material (left), storing after boiling
(middle), and tempering the tray hydrocolloid (right). The number on the
display shows the temperature setting in °F. Also shown in the figure are
the tray hydrocolloid, a syringe for injecting hydrocolloids, and an impression tray. Note that the two tubes extending out from the handle of the tray
are for water circulation.

tissues. Normally, the temperature of the syringe material is cooled
sufficiently as it is extruded, so it is comfortable for the patient. The
syringe material is first applied to the base of the preparation; then
the remainder of the prepared tooth is covered. The tip of the syringe
is held close to the tooth, and it remains embedded below the surface of the syringe material to prevent entrapment of air bubbles.
The water-soaked outer layer of the hydrocolloid-loaded tray and the
gauze covering the tray impression material are removed to ensure
firm bonding to the syringe hydrocolloid. The tray is immediately
brought into position, seated with light pressure, and held with a
very light force. Too much pressure may displace the syringed agar
sol from the tooth and distort the impression.
Gelation is accelerated by circulating cool water (approximately
18 to 21 °C) through the tray for 3 to 5 minutes. During the gelation process, the tray must be held in the mouth until gelation has
proceeded to a point at which the gel strength is sufficient to resist
deformation or fracture.
As discussed earlier in the section on elastomeric impression
materials, hydrocolloid materials exhibit viscoelastic behavior; therefore it is necessary to remove the impression with a
snap and not to tease it out. Any twisting or flexure should
be avoided. When properly done, the resulting impression will

290

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

H

H
O

O

OH
H

O

H

O
H

HO

H

O

O

HO
OH

H
H

OH
H

O

H

OH

Guluronic acid

O

H

OH
H

H

O

H

OH

OH
O

OH

O

H
H

H

H

HO

H

O

O
H

OH

Mannuronic acid

• Figure 13-14 Structural formula of alginic acid. Alginic acid is a linear copolymer with homopolymeric
blocks of β-D-mannuronic acid and its epimer α-L-guluronic acid covalently linked together in different
sequences or blocks.

TABLE 13-7 Powder Composition for an Alginate

Impression Material
Component

Function

Weight Percentage

Potassium alginate

Soluble alginate

15

Calcium sulfate

Reactor

16

Zinc oxide

Filler particles

4

Potassium titanium fluoride

Gypsum hardener

3

Diatomaceous earth

Filler particles

60

Sodium phosphate

Retarder

2

accurately reproduce the dimensions and details of hard and
soft tissues.

Distortion During Gelation
Some contraction occurs because of the physical change during the
sol–gel transformation. If the material is held firmly in the tray, the
impression material will shrink toward the center of its mass, thereby
creating larger dies. Because the sol is a poor thermal conductor,
rapid cooling may cause a stress concentration near the tray where
the gelation first takes place. Consequently, water at room temperature is more suitable for cooling the impression than is ice water.

alginate gel. It also produces a smooth texture and ensures the
formation of a firm gel surface that is not tacky. Zinc oxide also
acts as a filler and has some influence on the physical properties
and setting time of the gel. Calcium sulfate dihydrate is a reactor
providing calcium ions that crosslink the alginate sol. A retarder
is added to control the setting time. A fluoride, such as potassium
titanium fluoride, is added as an accelerator for the setting of the
stone to ensure a hard, dense cast surface when the stone sets in
the impression. This fluoride is also called a surface hardener.
When powder in the alginate can is fluffed to break the particles
loose, the diatomaceous earth, which is made up of fine porous silica
particles, will become airborne when the lid is removed. Long-term
exposure through inhalation of these fine silica particles can cause silicosis and pulmonary hypersensitivity. To reduce the dust encountered
after tumbling, manufacturers have introduced a “dustless” alginate in
which they have incorporated polyethylene glycol or polypropylene
glycol in the alginate powder to agglomerate the particles. This causes
the powder to become denser and less able to become airborne. Color
indicators have been added in some formulations to reveal the stage
of the setting reaction. This is to assist the operator in deciding when
to proceed to the next step of impression making.
Two-paste alginate impression materials are also available; these
are known as modified alginates. One paste contains a sol of alginate, fillers, retarder, and other ingredients like glycols and dextrose. The other paste consists of gypsum dihydrate, fillers, retarder,
glycerol or glycols, gypsum surface modifier, and some silicone oil.

CRITICAL QUESTION

Alginate (Irreversible Hydrocolloid)
The setting of alginate hydrocolloid is a process of crosslinking
alginic acids with calcium ions. The alginic acid, which is extracted
from brown seaweed, is a linear copolymer of β-D-mannuronic
acid and α-L-guluronic acid (Figure 13-14). Alginates with higher
levels of guluronic acid normally show a stronger interaction with
calcium and, hence, yield greater gel strength. For impressionmaking purposes, the alginate is richer in mannuronic acid.

Composition
The chief active ingredient in the alginate impression materials
is one of the soluble alginates, such as sodium, potassium, or triethanolamine alginate. Table 13-7 shows a formula for the powder
component of an alginate impression material. The diatomaceous
earth acts as a filler to increase the strength and stiffness of the

How does the retarder optimize the working time of alginate impression
material?

Gelation Process
The typical sol–gel reaction can be described simply as a reaction
of soluble alginate with calcium ions from calcium sulfate and
the formation of an insoluble calcium alginate. Structurally, calcium ions replace the sodium or potassium ions of two adjacent
molecules to produce a crosslinked complex or polymer network
(Figure 13-15). The production of the calcium alginate is so rapid
that it does not allow enough working time. A water-soluble
phosphate salt (e.g., trisodium phosphate) is added to the composition as a retarder to extend the working time. The strategy is
that the calcium ions react preferentially with the phosphate ions
in the solution. Thus the rapid reaction between calcium ions and

CHAPTER 13

Auxiliary Materials

291

O

O
Na
Na
O
C=O
O

Ca
5

O

C=O
O
O

O

O

O
C=O

O
C=O

O

O
Na
Na
O
C=O
O

Ca

O
C=O
O
O

O

O
C=O

O
C=O

O
Na
Na
O
C=O

O

3

2

1

O

O
O

Setting time (min)

4

O

O

0
0

10

20
30
Temperature (°C)

40

• Figure 13-16 Effect of water temperature on the setting time of an alginate impression material.

Ca
O

C=O

a new office or clinic location, the effect of the hardness of the tap
water on setting time should be considered as a possible cause.

• Figure 13-15 Schematic illustration of sodium alginate crosslinked with
calcium ions. The base molecules represent the sodium salt of alginic
acid, in which hydrogen atoms of carboxyl groups are replaced by sodium
atoms. Apart from polar groups, all side chains have been omitted for
simplification.

CRITICAL QUESTION

the soluble alginate is deferred until phosphate ions from trisodium phosphate are exhausted. The amount of retarder is adjusted
to provide the stated setting time.

Preparation of Alginate Impression Materials
The measured powder is added slowly to the premeasured water
that has already been poured into a clean rubber bowl. The powder is incorporated into the water by carefully mixing with a metal
or plastic spatula that is flexible to adapt well to the wall of the
mixing bowl. If the powder is placed in the mixing bowl first, penetration of the water to the bottom of the bowl is inhibited, and
a longer mixing time may be required to ensure a homogeneous
mix. Care should be taken to avoid incorporating excessive air into
the mix. A vigorous figure-eight stropping motion is best, with the
mix being wiped or stropped against the side of the rubber-mixing
bowl to express air bubbles. All the powder must be incorporated
thoroughly in the water.
The mixing time is particularly important; 45 seconds to
1 minute is generally enough, depending on the brand and
type of alginate (fast set or regular set). The instructions on
the package should be followed precisely for the mixing time,
working time, and setting time for the material one is using.
The result should be a smooth, creamy mixture that does not
readily drip off the spatula when it is raised from the bowl.
Several mechanical mixing devices are available for the alginate
materials. They include a rotating mixing bowl; a mechanical
mixer with a time-control unit; a vacuum mixer for powder/
water mixing; and a dynamic mechanical mixer, like the one for
elastomers (Figure 13-7, D), for two-paste alginate products.
Their principal benefits are convenience, speed, and the reduction of human error.

Controlling Setting Time
A slight modification in the water–powder (W/P) ratio or the
mixing time can have marked effects on two important properties
of the gel, tear strength and elasticity; thus the setting time is best
regulated by the amount of retarder added during the manufacturing process. Usually, the manufacturers make both fast-setting
alginate (1.5 to 3 minutes) and normal-setting alginate (3 to
4.5 minutes) to give clinicians a choice of the materials that best
suit their working style.
Clinicians, however, can safely influence the setting time by
altering the temperature of the water (Figure 13-16). The temperature of the mixing water should be controlled carefully within
a degree or two of a standard temperature, usually 20 °C, so that a
constant and reliable setting time can be obtained. In hot weather,
special precautions should be taken to provide cool water for mixing so that premature gelation does not occur. It may even be
necessary to precool the mixing bowl and spatula, especially when
small amounts of impression material are to be mixed.
Tap water naturally contains certain quantities of metallic ions,
primarily calcium and magnesium. It has been shown that compared
with distilled water for mixing of alginate impression material, the
use of tap water with a high hardness may accelerate the setting of
the alginate. If one observes that the setting time has decreased in

Why is it especially important to add water to the rubber mixing bowl before
adding the powder when one is mixing a fast-setting alginate impression
material?

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Clean equipment is important; contaminants, such as small
amounts of gypsum left in the bowl from a previous mix of plaster
or stone, can accelerate the set. It is best to use separate bowls for
mixing alginate and stone.
Ideally, the powder should be weighed and not measured by
volume using a scoop. However, unless a grossly incorrect or
inconsistent method is used for scooping the powder, the variations in individual mixes should have no measurable effect on the
physical properties.

Making Alginate Impression
It is imperative that the impression be retained on the tray so that
it can be withdrawn from the perimeter of the teeth. Therefore a
perforated metal tray is preferred. If a plastic tray or a metal rimlock tray is selected, a thin layer of alginate tray adhesive should be
applied and allowed to dry completely before mixing and loading
the alginate in the tray. Alginate is a weak material; therefore a
sufficient bulk of material is needed. The thickness of the alginate impression between the tray and the tissues should be at least
3 mm.
Most set alginate materials improve in elasticity over time; this
minimizes distortion of the material during impression removal,
thus permitting superior reproduction of undercut areas. Data
clearly indicate that the alginate impression should not be removed
from the mouth for at least 3 minutes after gelation has occurred.
It is possible to leave an alginate impression in the mouth too
long. With certain alginates, it has been shown that if the impression is held for 6 to 7 minutes after gelation rather than 3 minutes,
significant distortion may result.
Because alginate is a viscoelastic material, the speed of removal
must be a compromise between a rapid movement and a slower
rate that is more comfortable for the patient. Usually an alginate
impression does not adhere to the oral tissues as well as some
of the elastomers do, so it is easier to break the seal (“suction”)
first and then remove the alginate impression rapidly. It is always
best to avoid torqueing or twisting the impression to remove it
quickly.
Strength
Any deviation from the manufacturer’s instructions can have adverse
effects on the gel strength. For example, if too much or too little
water is used in mixing, the final gel will be weakened, making it less
elastic. Insufficient spatulation results in failure of the ingredients to
dissolve sufficiently so that the chemical reactions can proceed uniformly throughout the mass. Overmixing breaks up the formation
of the calcium alginate network and reduces its strength.
Shelf Life
Two major factors that affect the shelf life of alginate impression materials are storage temperature and moisture contamination from ambient air. The alginate impression powder can
be purchased in individually sealed bags or in bulk form in
a can. The individual bags are preferred because there is less
chance for contamination during storage and the correct W/P
ratio is ensured. Nevertheless, the bulk form in a can is by far
the most popular. If the bulk powder form of alginate is used,
the lid should be firmly replaced on the container as soon as
possible after dispensing the powder so that moisture contamination is minimized.
An expiration date under a stated condition of storage should
be clearly identified by the manufacturer on each package. It is
best not to stock more than a year’s supply in the dental office. The
material should be stored in a cool, dry environment.

Properties of Hydrocolloid Impression Materials
The quality of a stone cast depends on the properties of the hydrocolloid impressions before pouring and the potential interaction between
gypsum and alginate during the setting of the gypsum. In this section, details on dimensional stability, gypsum/hydrocolloid interaction, accuracy, disinfection, and effects of mishandling are described.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can distortion of a hydrocolloid impression be minimized during storage?

Dimensional Stability
Once the hydrocolloid impression is removed from the mouth and
exposed to air at room temperature, some shrinkage associated with
syneresis and evaporation will occur. Conversely, if the impression
is immersed in water, swelling caused by imbibition can occur.
Figure 13-17 shows that the material has shrunk in air and excessive expansion has occurred during subsequent imbibition.
Thermal changes also contribute to dimensional change. With
alginates, impressions shrink slightly because of the thermal differential between mouth temperature (37 °C) and room temperature
(23 °C). The agar hydrocolloids experience a temperature shift in
the opposite direction, from the chilled, water-cooled tray (15 °C)
to the warmer room temperature. Even this slight change can
cause the impression to expand and become less accurate.
If pouring of the impression must be delayed, the impression
should be rinsed in tap water, disinfected, wrapped in a surgical
paper towel, saturated with water, and placed in a sealed plastic
bag or humidor.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why do both agar and alginate include a gypsum hardener, and how does it
function?

Compatibility With Gypsum
Agar impression material contains borax, which is a known retarder
for the setting of gypsum products. The gelation process of alginate impressions produces not only insoluble calcium alginate but
also sodium sulfate, which is a gypsum-setting accelerator at low
concentration but becomes a retarder at a higher concentration.
In addition, polysaccharide also inhibits the setting of gypsum.
Because of retardation, the surfaces of the gypsum models prepared from hydrocolloid may be too soft for use as dies or casts.
0.2
Dimensional change (%)

292

0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
0

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
Time (min)

• Figure 13-17 Linear contraction of a representative reversible hydrocolloid in air (31% to 42% relative humidity) within the initial and subsequent
expansions in water. The dashed line indicates the start of water immersion.

CHAPTER 13

The deficiency of gypsum setting can be overcome by immers
ing agar impressions in a solution containing a gypsum setting accelerator, such as 2% potassium sulfate solution, prior
to pouring the impression with the gypsum-forming product or
by incorporating a gypsum surface hardener, such as potassium
titanium fluoride, in alginate (Table 13-7). The solubility of
potassium titanium fluoride is about 1.3 g per 100 mL of water
at 20 °C. The fluoride on the surface of alginate will form fine
calcium fluoride precipitates with the calcium from the gypsum.
Fine calcium fluoride particles become nuclei that accelerate the
setting of gypsum.
A rough stone surface will result if excess rinsing water has collected on the surface of the impression at the time of pouring the
stone mixture. A dried gel surface, on the other hand, will result in
its adherence to the surface of the cast, which can result in tearing
upon its removal. The surface of the impression should be shiny
but with no visible water film or droplets at the time of pouring.
After the impression has been filled with stone, somewhat superior
stone surfaces may be obtained if the impression is placed in a
humidor while the stone hardens.
The stone cast or die should be kept in contact with the impression for a minimum of 30 minutes, preferably for 60 minutes,
before the impression is separated from the cast. A longer time
may be needed for slow-setting gypsum. It is wise to separate the
cast from the impression within a reasonable time so that desiccation of the hydrocolloid does not occur, thereby avoiding abrasion
of the gypsum cast during its removal.

Auxiliary Materials

293

Disinfection
Because the hydrocolloid impression must be poured within a short
time after removal from the mouth, the disinfection procedure
should be relatively rapid to prevent a dimensional change. The
current protocol for disinfecting hydrocolloid impressions recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is to use
household bleach (1-to-10 dilution), iodophors, or synthetic phenols
as disinfectants. After the impression has been rinsed thoroughly, the
disinfectant can be sprayed liberally on the exposed surface. The
impression is then immediately wrapped in a disinfectant-soaked
paper towel and placed in a sealed plastic bag for 10 minutes. Finally,
the wrapped impression is removed from the bag, unwrapped,
rinsed, and shaken to remove excess water. The impression is then
poured with the stone of choice. An alternative disinfection method
is by immersion, but this should not exceed 10 minutes (Table 13-4).
Accuracy
Agar is among the most accurate of impression materials. Most
alginate impressions are not capable of reproducing the finer details
observed in impressions with other elastomeric impression materials.
Nevertheless, alginate materials are sufficiently accurate that they can
be used to make impressions for removable partial dentures.
Effects of Mishandling
Common causes of failures encountered with alginate impression
materials are summarized in Table 13-8.

Duplicating Materials

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the optimal method for disinfecting an alginate hydrocolloid
impression without causing significant distortion or degradation?

Both types of hydrocolloids are used in the dental laboratory to duplicate dental casts or models for the construction of prosthetic appliances and orthodontic models. Agar hydrocolloid is more popular in

TABLE 13-8 Common Causes of Failed Hydrocolloid Impressions

CAUSES
Effect

Agar

Alginate

Grainy material

Inadequate boiling
Storage temperature too low
Storage time too long

Improper mixing
Prolonged mixing
Excessive gelation
Water/powder ratio too low

Separation of syringe materials

Water-soaked tray material surface not removed material
Premature gelation of either material

Not applicable

Tearing

Inadequate bulk
Premature removal from mouth
Syringe material partially gelled when tray was seated

Inadequate bulk
Moisture contamination
Premature removal from mouth
Prolonged mixing

External bubbles

Gelation of syringe material, preventing flow

Undue gelation preventing flow
Air incorporated during mixing

Irregularly shaped voids

Material too cold

Moisture or debris on tissue

Rough or chalky stone model

Inadequate cleansing of impression
Excess water or hardening solution left in the impression
Premature removal of die
Improper manipulation of stone
Air drying of the impression before pouring

Inadequate cleaning of impression
Excess water left in impression
Premature removal of the impression
Model left in impression too long
Improper manipulation of stone

Distortion

Impression not poured within 30 min
Movement of tray during gelation
Premature removal from mouth
Improper removal from mouth
Use of ice water during initial stages of gelation

Impression not poured immediately
Movement of tray during gelation
Premature removal from mouth
Improper removal from mouth

294

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

the lab because it can be used many times. In addition, with intermittent stirring, agar hydrocolloid can be kept in a liquid form for 1
or 2 weeks at a constant pouring temperature. These factors make the
cost of reversible impression materials quite reasonable.
The hydrocolloid-type duplicating materials have the same
composition as the impression materials, but their water content is
higher. Consequently, the agar or alginate content is lower, which
influences their compressive strength and percent permanent set.
These property requirements are identified in ISO 14356:2003,
Dentistry—Duplicating material.

during the fitting of the tray. A compound stick may be softened
over a flame, but the sheet should be immersed in warm water to
ensure uniform softening of the material. The compound should
not be allowed to boil or ignite over the flame, and prolonged
immersion or overheating in the water can alter the chemistry of
the compound and the properties. Cold water can be sprayed on
the compound to assist in cooling.
Type II is a higher-fusing material in sheet form, also called
tray compound, and can be used to make primary impressions of
soft tissue to be used as a tray to support a thin layer of a second impression material, such as ZOE wash paste, hydrocolloid,
impression plaster, or elastomer, to make the secondary impression of the soft tissue.

Inelastic Impression Materials
Inelastic impression materials are brittle materials that exhibit an
insignificant amount of elastic deformation before fracture. They
include impression plaster, impression compound, and ZOE
impression paste. Because of their limited use in clinical dentistry
today, the discussion is brief and focused on compositions and
applications.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does ZOE set faster in a humid environment?

Zinc Oxide–Eugenol Impression Paste
The reaction between zinc oxide and eugenol yields a relatively
hard mass that has been involved in a wide range of applications in
dentistry, including use as an impression material for edentulous
mouths, a surgical dressing, a bite registration paste, a temporary
filling material, a root canal filling material, a cementing medium
(Chapter 7, Zinc Oxide Eugenol and Non-Eugenol Cements),
and a temporary relining material for dentures.
ZOE impression pastes are dispensed as two pastes. One tube
contains zinc oxide and vegetable or mineral oil; the other contains
eugenol, rosin, filler, and resinous balsam. The vegetable or mineral
oil acts as a plasticizer and aids in offsetting the action of the eugenol
as an irritant. The addition of rosin facilitates the speed of the reaction and yields a smoother, more homogeneous product. Resinous
balsam is often used to increase flow and improve mixing properties.
The setting reaction requires an ionic medium in which it can
proceed at any desired rate. It is well established that the first reaction is the hydrolysis of zinc oxide to its hydroxide (Figure 13-18).
In formulations that do not contain water in the paste, the setting
of the material is retarded until the mixed paste encounters moisture in the patient’s mouth. In any case, water provides additional
acceleration. One of the chief disadvantages of the ZOE pastes is
the possible stinging or burning sensation caused by the eugenol
as it leaches out and contacts soft tissues.
Mixing of the two pastes is accomplished on an oil-impervious paper or glass mixing slab. The proper proportion of the two
pastes is generally obtained by squeezing two strips of paste of the
same length, one from each tube, onto the mixing slab. A flexible
stainless-steel spatula is typically used for the mixing procedure.
The two strips of contrasting colors are combined with the first
stroke of the spatula, and the mixing is continued for approximately 1 minute, or as directed by the manufacturer, until a uniform color is achieved.

Impression Plaster
Impression plaster is a β-calcium sulfate hemihydrate powder (to
be discussed in the following section) mixed with water at a ratio
of 100 g powder to 50 to 60 mL of water. Its fluidity makes it suitable for making impressions of soft tissues in the uncompressed
state, a characteristic of mucostatic impression material. Freshly
mixed plaster is too fluid to be retained in a stock tray; a custom
tray is needed. Preliminary impressions can be made with dental
compound, and impression plaster can be used as the wash material, which is the same concept as in the putty-wash technique.
Historically, impression plaster had been used to make impressions of hard tissue before the era of elastic impression materials.
The clinician broke the plaster impression to facilitate removal
of the impression and reassembled the fragments to form a completed impression ready for pouring the cast. A separate medium
was applied on the impression to keep the cast from merging with
the impression plaster. The impression would be fractured again
to retrieve the cast.

Impression Compound
Impression compound, also called modeling plastic, is a thermoplastic material composed of waxes, thermoplastic resins, filler,
and a coloring agent. The low thermal conductivity of these
materials indicates the need to allow an extended time to achieve
uniform softness, thorough heating, and thorough hardening to
withdraw the impression from the mouth.
Type I is a lower-fusing material for making impressions of
a single tooth or for border molding of an acrylic custom tray
ZnO

+

H2O

Zn (OH)2

CH3

HO
2
CH3O

_
CH2 CH = CH2

+ Zn (OH)2

Eugenol

CH = CH _
2

CH2

O

O

Zn
O

O

+ 2 H2O

_
CH2 CH = CH2

CH3

• Figure 13-18 Setting reaction of zinc oxide−eugenol. Arrows between zinc and oxygen of methoxy
groups indicate coordinate bonds.

CHAPTER 13

These materials are classified as a hard paste (type I) or soft paste
(type II). The final set should occur within 10 minutes for a type I
paste (hard) and 15 minutes for a type II paste (soft). When the final
set occurs, the impression can be withdrawn from the mouth. The
actual time will be shorter when setting occurs in the mouth because
humidity and temperature can accelerate the setting reaction.
A paste of a thick consistency (high viscosity) can compress
the tissues, whereas a thin, fluid material results in an impression
that captures a negative replica of the tissues in a relaxed condition
with little or no compression. In any event, the impression paste
should be homogeneous. Pastes of varying consistencies are commercially available. An advantage of a heavier-consistency material
is its increased strength.
The dimensional stability of the impression pastes is quite satisfactory. A negligible shrinkage (less than 0.1%) may occur during hardening. No significant dimensional change subsequent to
hardening should occur with high-quality commercial products.
The impressions can be preserved indefinitely without the change
in shape that can result from relaxation or other causes of warping.
This condition can be satisfied only if the tray material is dimensionally stable.

Gypsum Products
Gypsum (CaSO4•2H2O; calcium sulfate dihydrate) is a mineral
mined in various parts of the world. Gypsum products are supplied as fine hemihydrate (CaSO4•½H2O) powders that are produced by heating ground gypsum particles. After mixing with
water, the mixture reverts to gypsum. This unique property of
gypsum products has led to numerous applications throughout
history. A mixture of plaster (a gypsum product), lime, and water
was used in joining the stone blocks of ancient Egypt’s pyramids.
Gypsum and gypsum products are used widely in building construction, soil conditioning, food additives, pharmaceuticals,
medical devices, and dental applications.
The primary applications of gypsum products in dentistry include
the production of study models for oral and maxillofacial structures
and use as auxiliary materials for dental laboratories involved in the
production of dental prostheses. When refractory fillers are added,
the gypsum product becomes more heat resistant and is known as a
gypsum-based investment, capable of forming molds for the casting
of alloys (Chapter 14, Gypsum-Bonded Investments).

A

B

Auxiliary Materials

295

CRITICAL QUESTION
Calcination is a process of removing the water of crystallization from the
dihydrate. What happens if hemihydrate powder is mixed with water?

Production of Gypsum Products
Gypsum products are produced by grinding the gypsum and subjecting it to temperatures of 110 to 130 °C in open containers to
drive off part of the crystalline water (Figure 13-19). The principal
constituent of gypsum products is calcium sulfate hemihydrate.
The resulting particle is a fibrous aggregate of fine crystals with
capillary pores (Figure 13-20, A) known as plaster of Paris or dental plaster in dentistry. As the temperature is further raised, plaster becomes hexagonal anhydrite and orthorhombic anhydrite.
This process is known as calcination.
When gypsum is heated in a kettle, vat, or rotary kiln that
maintains a moist environment, a crystalline hemihydrate called
dental stone is produced (Figure 13-20, B). The powders are often
referred to as α-hemihydrate for dental stone and β-hemihydrate for
plaster of Paris.
If the calcination process occurs under pressure in a 30%
calcium chloride solution or in the presence of more than 1%
of sodium succinate, the process yields shorter and thicker
hemihydrate crystals called modified α-hemihydrate or die stone
(Figure 13-20, C). Residual calcium chloride and sodium succinate are removed by washing the powder with hot water.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the mechanism of reverting calcium sulfate hemihydrate to dihydrate?

CaSO4  2H2O Gypsum (calcium sulfate dihydrate)
110–130 °C

CaSO4  ½H2O Plaster or stone (calcium sulfate hemihydrate)
130–200 °C

Hexagonal anhydrite

CaSO4
200–1000 °C

CaSO4

Orthorhombic anhydrite

• Figure 13-19 Calcination process for gypsum.

C

• Figure 13-20 Three types of powder particles in gypsum-producing products (×400). A, Plaster of Paris
(β-hemihydrate particles); crystals are spongy and irregular in shape. B, Dental stone (α-hemihydrate);
crystals are prismatic and more regular in shape than those of plaster. C, Improved stone (modified
α-hemihydrate); the cube-shaped particles have a reduced surface area that improves the flow of the
mixture.

296

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Setting of Gypsum Products
The reaction between gypsum products and water produces solid
gypsum, and the heat evolved in the exothermic reaction is equivalent to the heat used originally for calcination. Set gypsum products probably never attain 100% conversion at room temperature.

Setting Reaction
There are three theories of gypsum setting. The colloidal theory proposes that, when mixed with water, hemihydrate enters the colloidal
state through a sol–gel mechanism. In the sol state, hemihydrate particles are hydrated to form the dihydrate state. As the water added
is consumed, the mass converts to a solid gel. The hydration theory
suggests that sulfate groups in rehydrated plaster particles unite
through hydrogen bonding with water to form the set material.
The most widely accepted theory is the dissolution–precipitation mechanism, which is based on the fact that the solubility of hemihydrate in water is greater than that of the dihydrate
near room temperature (Figure 13-21). Thus the setting reactions
occur as follows:
1. The hemihydrate particles form a fluid suspension after mixing in water.
2. The water becomes a saturated solution of Ca2+ and (SO4)2− as
the hemihydrate dissolves.
3. This saturated hemihydrate solution is a supersaturated solution with respect to the solubility of the dihydrate; precipitation of dihydrate occurs.
4. As the dihydrate precipitates, the hemihydrate continues to
dissolve. The process continues until no further dihydrate can
precipitate out of solution.
In reality, the setting is likely achieved by a combination of the
three mechanisms.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can one determine whether the hemihydrate and water mixture has set?

0.9
0.8
0.7

Solubility in percent

Hemihydrate
0.6

Gypsum
Anhydrite

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220
Temperature (°C)

• Figure 13-21 Temperature dependence of calcium sulfate solubility in
water.

Quantifying Setting Reactions
The hemihydrate and water must be mixed uniformly and maintain a workable state to facilitate pouring of a model or the casting
investment. The time from the addition of powder to the water
until mixing is completed is called the mixing time, which takes 20
to 30 seconds via mechanical mixing or at least a minute of hand
spatulation. The time from the start of mixing to the point when
the consistency is no longer acceptable for the product’s intended
purpose is the working time. Generally, a 3-minute working time
should allow sufficient time for mixing, pouring an impression
and a spare impression, and cleaning the equipment before the
gypsum becomes unworkable. As the reaction proceeds, the excess
water on the surface is taken up in forming the dihydrate, so the
mix loses surface gloss and gains strength. One must also recognize that the mixture needs to develop enough strength to resist
fracture during the removal of the model from the impression.
When the mix can resist penetration by a Gillmore needle, which
has a tip that is 2.12 mm (1/12 inch) in diameter and weighs
113.4 g (¼ lb), the time elapsed is called the initial setting time. At
this point, the mass still has no measurable compressive strength,
and the cast cannot be safely removed from the impression. The
elapsed time at which a heavier Gillmore needle, weighing 453.6 g
(1 lb) and with a tip that is 1.06 mm (1/24 inch) in diameter,
leaves only a barely perceptible mark on the surface is called the
final setting time.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can we control gypsum’s setting rate?

Control of the Setting Time
There are three factors that control setting time:
1. Solubility of the hemihydrate—Increasing solubility of the
hemihydrate achieves supersaturation of the dihydrate faster.
2. Number of nuclei of crystallization—The greater the number
of nuclei of crystallization, the faster the dihydrate crystals
will form.
3. Rate of crystal growth—Increasing or decreasing the rate of
crystal growth will accelerate or retard the setting time.
In practice, these factors have been incorporated in the formulation of the material by the manufacturer and by manipulation
techniques performed by the operator. For example, fine gypsum
particle residues from incomplete calcination or addition by the
manufacturer will shorten the setting time because of the increase
in the number of nuclei.
The amounts of water and hemihydrate should be gauged
accurately by weight. The weight (or volume) of the water divided
by the weight of the hemihydrate powder is the W/P ratio. For
example, if 100 g of dental stone is mixed with 28 mL of water,
the W/P ratio is 0.28. This ratio is an important factor in determining the physical and mechanical properties of the final gypsum product. The use of a higher W/P ratio decreases the number
of nuclei per unit volume, with a longer setting time.
During mixing, dihydrate crystals form and are broken into
fine particles by the spatulation. These particles become nuclei
of crystallization. Therefore, within practical limits, a longer and
more rapid mixing of the gypsum will result in a shorter setting
time.
Usually an increase in water temperature leads to an acceleration of a chemical setting reaction. Figure 13-21 shows that the
difference in solubility between hemihydrate and gypsum becomes
smaller with increasing temperature, and this condition lowers the

CHAPTER 13

Molecular mass (g)
Density (g/cm3)
Equivalent volume (cm3)

(CaSO4)2 • H2O + 3H2O
54.05
290.28
1.00
2.75
54.21
105.56

Auxiliary Materials

297

2 CaSO4 • 2 H2O
344.33
2.32
148.41

(105.56 + 54.21) – 148.41 × 100% = 7.11%
(105.56 + 54.21)

• Figure 13-22 Volume changes from conversion of calcium sulfate hemihydrate to dihydrate.
driving force for forming the dihydrate; a temperature increase
also results in a slower setting reaction. The decreased driving force
causes the effect of temperature on the setting time to be erratic
and to vary from one material to another.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the recommended methods to accelerate or retard the setting time
for a given gypsum-forming product?

Modifiers for Controlling Setting Time
Chemical modifiers have been used extensively to increase or
decrease the setting time of gypsum products; they are called
retarders and accelerators, respectively. The manufacturers use both
types of compounds to formulate gypsum products with specific
setting times.
It has been observed that strong inorganic acids and their salts
with strong or weak bases are accelerators. The most commonly
used accelerator is potassium sulfate, which is particularly effective in concentrations up to 2%. Slurry water flowing out from a
model trimmer contains numerous fine gypsum particles that act
as nuclei of crystallization and are an effective accelerator. Stirring
the slurry water before use is important to disperse these fine gypsum particles. Increasing the time or the speed of mixing can create more nuclei by crushing the developing dihydrate crystals into
smaller particles, thereby accelerating the setting of the mix. At a
concentration of 2% of the hemihydrate, sodium chloride is an
accelerator. Sodium sulfate has its maximum acceleration effect at
approximately 3.4%. Several inorganic salts play dual roles in the
setting kinetics of dihydrate, which are accelerators at low concentration and retarders at higher concentration. For example, borax,
a known retarder for gypsum setting, has also been shown to promote the growth of dihydrate crystals, but only at a concentration
lower than 0.2 mM (about 0.08 g/L).
One should recognize that significant acceleration of the reaction time could compromise the optimal flow characteristics of
the material. The manufacturer has added accelerators, retarders,
and other controlling agents, so adding other ingredients that may
counteract the effects of components that are already incorporated
into the product is not wise. Therefore one should select a product
from the manufacturer’s catalog with the specific setting time that
the operator needs.

CRITICAL QUESTION
When a mixture of hemihydrate and water sets, the resulting object is always
porous. Why?

Setting Expansion
Regardless of the type of gypsum product selected, an expansion
of the mass can be detected during the formation dihydrate. The
observed linear expansion may be as low as 0.06% or as high as

0.5%. This phenomenon is contrary to what is expected when
hemihydrate reverts to the denser dihydrate form. If equivalent
volumes of the hemihydrate, water, and the reaction product
(dihydrate) are compared, the volume of the dihydrate formed
will be 7.11% less than the equivalent combined volumes of the
hemihydrate and water (Figure 13-22). The phenomenon of setting expansion can be explained based on crystallization.

Mechanism of Setting Expansion
The crystallization of dihydrates can be pictured as an outgrowth
of crystals from nuclei of crystallization. Crystals growing from
the nuclei can intermesh with and obstruct the growth of adjacent crystals. When the process repeats itself with thousands of
the crystals during growth, an outward stress or thrust results in
an expansion of the entire mass. Thus a setting expansion can take
place even though the true volume of the crystals alone may be less
than calculated. Therefore the structure immediately after setting
is composed of interlocking crystals, between which are micropores and pores containing the excess water required for mixing.
On drying, the excess water is lost, resulting in a porous structure.
Figure 13-23 shows the dimensional change during the setting of a gypsum product. The mixture exhibits an initial contraction followed by an expansion and smaller contraction. The
initial contraction is caused by the surface tension of water pulling
the particles closer. When the mixture is poured into an impression, the gypsum may continue contracting during the induction
period. That contraction is of no concern because the mixture still
flows and adapts to the impression. Only when the mixture is
sufficiently rigid (after the initial set) will the force of expansion
produce a visible setting expansion of the cast.
It is important to note that only the setting expansion that
occurs after the initial set is of interest. When enough crystals
have formed to produce the outward thrust by impingement, setting expansion follows. The onset of the initial setting occurs at
approximately the minimal point of the curve, the point at which
expansion begins. Because the contraction prior to the initial setting occurs at the free surface, the final dimension of the cast relative to that of the impression mold includes a setting expansion
of approximately 0.12%, according to Figure 13-23. Naturally,
the quantities of setting expansion vary among different gypsum
products.
Control of Setting Expansion
As can be noted from the results presented in Table 13-9, a lower
W/P ratio and a longer mixing time will increase the setting
expansion. Each of these factors increases the nuclei density. The
effect of the W/P ratio on the setting expansion is to be expected
on theoretical grounds. At higher W/P ratios, fewer nuclei of crystallization per unit volume are present compared with the greater
density of nuclei in thicker mixes. Because it can be assumed that
the space between the nuclei is greater in such a case, it follows
that there is less growth interaction of the dihydrate crystals and
less outward thrust. However, the most effective method by which

298

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

(I)

Setting expansion (%)

0.1

(II)

(III)

(IV)

(V)

Normal setting conditions (N)

0.0
-0.1
-0.2

Hygroscopic setting conditions (H)

-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6
0

10

20

30
Time (min)

40

50

60

e

e

e

e
H

• Figure 13-23 Dimensional changes that occur during the setting of a
gypsum product. The arrow indicates the initial set at approximately the
lowest point of the curve.

e

t

Initial mix

H
N

t

H
N

H
t

Initial crystal Solid phase
growth
contact

N

N
t

t

Expansion

Termination

Expansion vs. time curve

TABLE 13-9 Effect of Water/Powder (W/P) Ratio and

Mixing Time on Setting Expansion of
Plaster of Paris
W/P Ratio

Mixing Time (min)

Setting Expansion (%)

0.45

0.6

0.41

0.45

1.0

0.51

0.60

1.0

0.29

0.60

2.0

0.41

0.80

1.0

0.24

From Gibson CS, Johnson RN: Investigations of the setting of plaster of Paris, J Soc
Chem Ind 51(1):25T, 1932.

to control setting expansion is through the addition of chemicals
by the manufacturer.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Thus far, the setting of plaster or stone has occurred in air. What would
happen if the hemihydrate and water mixture could set underwater? Keep
in mind that the solubilities of hemihydrate and dihydrate are very low in
water, and one should not be concerned that the mixture will dissolve without
vigorous stirring.

Hygroscopic Setting Expansion
Imagine that the initial mix is represented in the top row of
Figure 13-24 (stage I) by the three round particles of hemihydrate surrounded by water. Under normal setting conditions, the
crystals of the dihydrate begin to form on the nuclei. The water
around the particles is reduced by hydration, and these particles
are drawn more closely together because the surface tension of
the water keeps the water surface area at a minimum (stage II).
As the crystals of dihydrate grow, they contact each other, and
the water around the particles again decreases (stage III). Further
dihydrate growth consumes more water and should draw the crystals together as before, but the outward thrust of the growing crystals opposes this contraction (stage IV). Eventually, the crystals
become intermeshed and entangled (stage V).

• Figure 13-24 Diagrammatic representation of the setting expansion of
gypsum products. In the top row, the crystal growth is inhibited by the
surface tension of water surrounding the growing crystals. In the middle
row, the gypsum mixture (the area surrounded by the dashed circle) is
immersed in water during setting (represented by the larger solid circle);
the immersion water provides more room for longer crystal growth. The
bottom row shows the expansion (e) over time (t) for hygroscopic setting
expansion (H) and normal setting expansion (N). (Adapted from Mahler
DB, Ady AB: An explanation for the hygroscopic setting expansion of dental gypsum products, J Dent Res 39:378–379, 1960.)

Stage I of the middle row (hygroscopic setting conditions)
of Figure 13-24 shows an identical mixture of hemihydrate
(the area delineated by the dashed circle) underwater (the area
outside of the dashed circle). The hydration of hemihydrate
particles here would proceed as usual. Because they are surrounded by a body of water, the surface tension of water will
not be pulling or pushing these growing crystals (stage II).
As the dihydrate crystals continue to grow and contact each
other, no reduction in the distance between crystals is expected
(stage III). This means that the crystals will grow much more
freely during the early stages (stage IV) before the intermeshing finally prevents further expansion (stage V). Consequently,
the observed setting expansion that occurs when the gypsum
product sets underwater is greater than that which occurs during setting in air.
To distinguish between the two setting conditions, the setting
expansion without water immersion is usually called normal setting expansion (N in the bottom row of Figure 13-24), whereas
the expansion that occurs underwater is known as hygroscopic
setting expansion (H in the bottom row of Figure 13-24).
The hygroscopic expansion obtained during the setting of dental stone or plaster is about twice that of the normal setting expansion. This property has been used in the formulation of investment
materials to compensate for the casting shrinkage. More discussion on the hygroscopic expansion of investment materials is presented in Chapter 14, Hygroscopic Setting Expansion.
Note that hygroscopy means the ability of a substance to
attract water molecules from the surrounding environment
through either absorption or adsorption. The hygroscopic setting expansion described here is not the result of absorption
or adsorption. Therefore the term hygroscopic setting expansion

CHAPTER 13

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the presence of water in the pores of set gypsum affect the
strength of the gypsum object?

Strength of Set Gypsum Products
The strength of set gypsum products as a brittle material is generally expressed in terms of compressive strength.

Effect of Water Content
The free water content of the set product affects product
strength. For this reason, two strength properties of gypsum
are reported: the wet strength (also known as green strength)
and the dry strength. The wet strength is the strength that is
determined when water in excess of that required for hydration
of the hemihydrate remains in the test specimen. When such
excess water is removed by drying, the strength obtained is the
dry strength. The dry strength may be two or more times as high
as the wet strength.
The effect of drying period on the compressive strength of set
plaster is shown in Table 13-10. Note the relatively slight gain in
strength that occurred after 8 hours of drying and the loss of water.
Between an 8-hour and a 24-hour drying period, only 0.6% of the
excess water was lost, yet the strength doubled. A similar change
in surface hardness takes place during the drying process. Keep in
mind that the excess water in the set gypsum products is saturated
with Ca2+ and SO42−. As the last trace of water is lost, fine crystals
of gypsum precipitate serve as anchors between the larger crystals.
Thus, if excess water is reconstituted by immersion or absorption,
these small crystals are the first to dissolve, and the reinforcing
anchors are lost.
Microwave irradiation has been used to speed up the drying
and disinfection of gypsum casts. The influence on the strength of
the gypsum cast, however, is inconclusive. In general, microwave
irradiation, a timesaving procedure, may be associated with some
dimensional changes. The time needed varies with the microwave
oven setting and the type of cast being dried.
TABLE 13-10 Effect of Drying Period on the

Strength of Plaster of Paris
Compressive Strength
(MPa)

Weight Loss (%)

2

9.6

5.1

4

11.7

11.9

8

11.7

17.4

16

13.0

—

24

23.3

18.0

48

23.3

18.0

Drying Period (h)

72

23.3

—

From Gibson CS, Johnson RN: Investigations of setting of plaster of Paris, J Soc Chem
Ind 51(1):25–38, 1932.

299

Effect of Water/Powder Ratio
As previously noted, the set plaster or stone is porous, and the
greater the W/P ratio, the greater the porosity. As might be expected
on such a basis, the greater is the W/P ratio, the less is the strength
of the set material, as shown by the data in Table 13-11, because
fewer dihydrate crystals are available per unit volume.
Figure 13-25 is a plot of the strength as a function of the W/P
ratio for the five different types of gypsum products used in dentistry (discussed later). The figure includes data from many of the
products on the market that meet ANSI/ADA Specification No. 25
or ISO 6873 for dental gypsum products (Table 13-12). The
compression test was conducted 1 hour after the start of mixing;
therefore the values obtained are wet strength of the materials
tested. Although the W/P ratio varies for the brand of plaster or
stone, the typical recommended ranges of W/P ratios are shown in
Table 13-12 for the five types of gypsum products.

TABLE 13-11 Effect of the Water/Powder (W/P) Ratio

and Mixing Time on the Strength of
Plaster of Paris
Mixing Time (min)

Compressive Strength
(MPa)

0.45

0.5

23.4

0.45

1.0

26.2

0.60

1.0

17.9

0.60

2.0

13.8

0.80

1.0

11.0

W/P Ratio

From Gibson CS, Johnson RN: Investigations of setting of plaster of Paris, J Soc Chem
Ind 51(1):25T, 1932.

70
Type V
60
Compressive strength (MPa)

of gypsum products is technically incorrect. Nonetheless, this
term is retained in explanations of the setting expansion of gypsum.

Auxiliary Materials

Conditions: wet, 1 hour,
hand mixed

50

ADA Specification no. 25

40
Type III
Type IV

30

Type II
20
10

Type I

0
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

W/P ratio

• Figure 13-25 One-hour compressive strength as a function of water/
powder (W/P) ratio for five types of gypsum products. ADA, American
Dental Association.

300

PA RT I V

TABLE 13-12

Fabrication of Prostheses

Typical W/P Ratios and Properties Requirements of Gypsum Products

Type

W/P Ratio

Setting Time* (min)

2-h Setting
Expansion* (%)

1-h Compressive
Strength† (MPa)

I. Plaster, impression

0.50–0.75

2.5–5.0

0.0–0.15

4.0§–8.0†

II. Plaster, model

0.45–0.50

TBD

0.0–0.30

9.0§

III. Dental stone

0.28–0.30

TBD

0.0–0.20

20.0§

IV. Dental stone, high strength

0.22–0.24

TBD

0.0–0.15

35.0§

V. Dental stone, high strength,
high expansion

0.18–0.22

TBD

0.16–0.30

35.0§

TBD—The setting time should be within 20% of the value claimed by manufacturer.
*Property requirements specified in ANSI/ADA Specification No. 25 and ISO 6873:2013.
§

Minimum strength value.

†

Maximum strength value.

Effect of Manipulation and Additives
As shown in Table 13-11, the mixing time also affects the strength
of the plaster. In general, an increase in mixing time increases the
strength to a limit. If the mixture is overmixed, the gypsum crystals will be broken up, and the final product will hold less crystalline interlocking structure.
The addition of an accelerator or retarder lowers both the wet
strength and the dry strength of the gypsum product. Such a
decrease in strength can be partially attributed to the salt added
as an adulterant and to the reduction in intercrystalline cohesion.
When relatively pure hemihydrate is mixed with minimal
amounts of water, the working time is short, and the setting expansion is unduly high. However, as just noted, dental gypsum products contain additives that reduce the setting expansion, increase
the working time, and provide a rapid final set. The addition of
more chemicals can upset the delicate balance of these properties. Thus, if a change is desired in the setting time, this should
be controlled by modest alterations in the W/P ratio and/or the
spatulation time.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which properties are used to classify the various types of gypsum products?

Types of Gypsum Products
ANSI/ADA Specification No. 25 classifies five types of gypsum products and gives the property requirements for each type (Table 13-12).
Some gypsum materials are formulated for special purposes, such
as for pouring orthodontic casts or attaching casts to an articulator. The criterion for selecting any gypsum product depends on the
intended use and the physical properties necessary for that particular use.

Impression Plaster (Type I)
These impression materials are composed of plaster of Paris to
which modifiers have been added to regulate the setting time and
setting expansion. Impression plaster is now rarely used for making dental impressions because plaster has been replaced by less
rigid materials such as the hydrocolloids and elastomers. Descriptions of the impression plaster and applications were given earlier.

Model Plaster (Type II)
Model plaster or laboratory type II plaster is now used principally
to fill a flask used in denture construction when setting expansion is not critical and the strength is adequate according to the
limits cited in the ADA specification or ISO standard. It is usually
marketed in the natural white color, thus contrasting with stones,
which are generally colored.
Dental Stone (Type III)
Type III stone has a minimal 1-hour compressive strength of
20.0 MPa. It is intended for the construction of casts in the fabrication of full dentures to fit soft tissues. For this application, a
slight setting expansion can be tolerated in casts that reproduce
soft tissues, but not when teeth are involved. Type III stones are
preferred for casts used to process dentures because the stone has
enough strength for this purpose but low enough strength for
separating the denture from the cast.
There are at least two methods for the construction of the cast.
One method is to construct a mold by wrapping soft flat wax strips
around the impression so that they extend approximately 12 mm
beyond the tissue side of the impression. This process is called boxing,
which forms the base of the cast. The mixture of stone and water is
then poured into the impression under vibration. Another method
is to fill the impression first as described but without wrapping. The
remainder of the stone–water mixture is poured on a glass plate. The
filled impression is then inverted over a mound of stone, and the base
is shaped with the spatula before the stone sets. Such a procedure is
not indicated if the impression can easily be deformed or if the stone
is “runny.” The cast should not be separated from the impression
until the stone has hardened. The minimal time allowed for setting
varies from 45 to 60 minutes, depending on the rate of setting of the
stone or plaster and the type of impression material used.
Dental Stone, High Strength (Type IV)
The principal requisites for a die material are strength, hardness,
and minimal setting expansion. To obtain these properties, modified α-hemihydrate, also called die stone, is used.
A hard surface is necessary for a die stone because the tooth
preparation is covered with wax and carved flush with the margins of the die. A sharp instrument is used for this purpose; therefore the stone must be resistant to abrasion. Gypsum hardening

CHAPTER 13

solutions, silver plating, coating with cyanoacrylate adhesive, and
other methods of increasing the abrasion resistance are discussed
in Chapter 14, Preparation of the Master Die. It is fortunate that
the surface hardness increases more rapidly than the compressive strength because the surface dries more rapidly. This is a real
advantage in that the surface resists abrasion, whereas the core of
the die is tough and less subject to accidental breakage. The average dry surface hardness of the type IV stones is approximately 92
(Rockwell hardness), and that of type III stone is 82. Even though
the surface of the type IV stone is harder, care should be taken
when the pattern is being carved.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Under what conditions might a type V dental stone be used?

Dental Stone, High Strength, High Expansion (Type V)
This gypsum product exhibits an even higher compressive strength
than the type IV dental stone. The improved strength is attained
by lowering the W/P ratio even further than that used for type IV
stone. In addition, the setting expansion has been increased from
a maximum of 0.16% to 0.30% (Table 13-12). The rationale for
increasing the setting expansion is the use of base metals that have a
greater casting shrinkage than do the traditional noble-metal alloys
(Chapter 9, Alternative Technologies for Fabricating Prostheses).
Thus higher expansion is required in the stone die to aid in compensating for the alloy solidification shrinkage. The use of a type V
stone may also be indicated when the expansion achieved during
the fabrication of cast crowns is inadequate. One should avoid the
use of type V stones for producing dies for inlays and onlays because
the higher expansion may lead to an unacceptably tight fit.
Special Gypsum Products
The orthodontist prefers a white stone or plaster for study models and may treat the surface with soap to acquire sheen. These
products generally have a longer working time that reduces void
formation and facilitates trimming.
Mounting casts to articulators requires a gypsum product, which
is referred to as “mounting” stone or plaster. These products are fast
setting and exhibit low setting expansion. In addition, they have a
sufficiently low strength, permitting easy trimming and facilitating
separation of casts from the articulator mounting plates.
Some products are designed to save time. One type is extremely
fast setting and is ready to use in 5 minutes, but it has little working time. Another product changes color to indicate when it is
ready for use. In addition, one specialty product contains a small
amount of plastic or resin to reduce brittleness and improve resistance to abrasion during the carving of wax patterns.

Manipulation of Gypsum Products
In practice, clinicians and technicians must not only produce a
cast using a gypsum-producing material, but they must also store
the powder properly and maintain the cast in the best condition
for subsequent procedures.

Care of Gypsum Products
If the relative humidity of the surroundings exceeds 70%, the
plaster absorbs sufficient moisture from the air to start a setting
reaction. The initial hydration probably produces a few dihydrate crystals on the surface of the exposed hemihydrate particles.

Auxiliary Materials

301

These dihydrate crystals can act as nuclei of crystallization and
accelerate the setting when the powder is mixed with water. If the
hydration continues during storage, hemihydrate crystals could
become completely covered with dihydrate crystals. Under these
conditions, the water penetrates the dihydrate coating with difficulty, and the setting time is prolonged. The best means of storage
is to seal the product in a moisture-proof metal container.

Proportioning
The measurement should be made with a graduated cylinder for
water by volume and a weighing balance for the weight of powder.
Measurement of powder by volume is not reliable because of nonuniform powder packing. Preweighed envelopes are very popular
because they promote accuracy, reduce waste, and save time.
Mixing and Pouring
If mixing is performed by hand, the bowl should be parabolic in
shape, smooth, and resistant to abrasion. The spatula should have
a stiff blade and a handle that is convenient to hold. A measured
amount of water is placed in the bowl first, followed by sifting
the weighed powder into the water as initial hand mixing is performed. The mixture is then vigorously stirred, with periodic wiping of the inside of the bowl with the spatula to ensure wetting of
all the powder and breaking up of any agglomerates or lumps. The
mixing should continue until a smooth mix is obtained, usually
within a minute. A longer spatulation time drastically reduces the
working time. The use of a vibrator of high frequency and low
amplitude to reduce air entrapment is essential before pouring.
The preferred method of mixing is to use a mechanical mixer
under vacuum. First, the measured water is added to the bowl, followed by gradual addition of the preweighed powder. The powder
is incorporated during approximately 15 seconds of mixing with
a hand spatula, followed by 20 to 30 seconds of mechanical mixing under vacuum. The strength and hardness obtained from such
vacuum mixing usually exceed that obtained by hand mixing.
Before pouring, the mixing bowl with the dental stone mixture
should be vibrated to eliminate more entrapped air and set aside. The
impression tray is held in one hand against the vibrator. The surface
of the impression should be free of excess water. When tooth preparations are involved, a small spatula about the size of the preparation
may be used to deliver enough stone to fill all preparations. The speed
of the vibrator should be adjusted high enough to make the stone
flow slowly into the space. After the preparation and the anterior
teeth are filled, more dental stone can be added from one open end of
the impression (e.g., in the last molar of a full-arch impression). The
impression may be tilted to facilitate the movement of the stone into
the tooth depression. Additional stone is added behind the moving
front to promote the flow of stone and to ensure that the previously
filled area does not lose much of its volume. Once the tooth depressions are filled, larger amounts of dental stone can be added under
light vibration to fill the remaining impression up to the mucobuccal
fold or rim of the boxed area around the impression tray. The impression is then briefly placed on the vibrator for a few seconds to distribute the stone evenly across the impression.
If the inversion method is used, a mound of stone about 20 mm
high is made on a flat surface, such as a glass plate, with the remainder of the mixture or with a new mix using a lower W/P ratio.
The stone in the filled impression should exhibit the initial set but
not the final set before the impression is then inverted over the
mound of stone. The base is shaped with the spatula, and the entire
assembly is left undisturbed until the material has set completely.
The dental stone model is then separated from the impression.

302

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

CRITICAL QUESTION
What storage conditions are necessary to maintain the dimensional accuracy
of a gypsum cast?

Care of the Cast
The cast dimensions should be relatively constant under ordinary
conditions of room temperature and humidity. However, soaking
casts in water may be necessary in preparation for other procedures. A study has reported that a stone cast immersed in a container under running water will lose approximately 0.1% of the
cast’s linear dimension for every 20 minutes of immersion. Therefore the safest method for soaking the cast is to place the cast in
a water bath with gypsum debris remaining on the bottom of the
container to provide a saturated solution of calcium sulfate.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What procedure should be followed if it is uncertain whether the impression
or the gypsum cast has been disinfected?

Infection Control
Concern over possible cross-contamination of dental office personnel
by microorganisms, including hepatitis B virus and human immunodeficiency virus, via dental impressions has prompted study of the
effect of spray- and immersion-disinfecting techniques on impression
materials. The effect of such agents on the surface quality and accuracy of the resulting gypsum casts is an important consideration.
If an impression has not been disinfected or if the laboratory had
no assurance that an appropriate disinfection protocol was followed,
disinfecting the stone cast will be necessary. Disinfection solutions
can be used that do not adversely affect the quality of the gypsum
cast. Alternatively, disinfectants can either be incorporated in the
powder or dissolved in the mixing water. The addition of a disinfectant in the gypsum products would undoubtedly influence some of
the properties of certain products, such as strength, setting expansion, and setting time. The precise effect depends on the types of
gypsum and antimicrobial agents used. Nonetheless, the disinfected
stones apparently compare favorably with nondisinfected controls.
The same microwave irradiation used in drying gypsum casts
has also been evaluated in infection control. One study showed
that a 5-minute irradiation at 900 W reduced microorganism
counts (cfu/mL), with a median log value of 6 to median counts
(cfu/mL) of zero. Data on the effectiveness of microwave irradiation on different microorganism species, based on the power
setting, the duration needed, and the influence of prolonged irradiation on the properties of the gypsum cast, are not available.
The widespread availability of a spectrum of disinfected dental
stone casts (type III to type V) with proven efficacy and unimpaired physical properties will undoubtedly strengthen the barrier
system of infection control in the dental laboratory.

Dental Waxes
Wax is a thermoplastic polymer that can be molded with or without a slightly elevated temperature and retain the new shape when
cooled to room temperature. The fabrication of fixed and removable dental protheses uses various forms of wax during clinical
procedures or processing in the laboratory. Clinical products
include bite registration wax, disclosing wax (pressure-indicating
paste), utility waxes for altering and adapting impression trays,
and waxes for making wax patterns. Laboratory products include

boxing wax, baseplate wax, sticky wax, beading wax, utility wax,
and waxes for making pattern prostheses on patients’ models.
Waxes for dental procedures are a blend of natural and synthetic waxes. Natural waxes are taken from plants, insects, animals, or minerals (including petroleum); synthetic waxes are
made by the synthesis of polymers or the modification of natural
waxes. Mineral-based waxes are mostly mixtures of hydrocarbons,
whereas waxes from plants, insects, and animals contain hydrocarbons with ester and some with alcohol or acid. Synthetic waxes
are typically composed of hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, and chlorine. Synthetic waxes are more uniform than natural waxes in their
structure and more homogeneous in composition.

Components of Dental Waxes
Blending natural and synthetic waxes along with other additives creates unique working characteristics for the intended applications. For
example, coloring agents are added to provide a contrast of wax patterns against the hues of teeth, dies, and model surfaces. Ivory-colored
wax is useful for aesthetic case presentations to patients. Fillers can be
added to control expansion and shrinkage of the wax product. Some
major components of dental waxes are discussed next.
Paraffin, derived from fractions of petroleum, is a colorless or
white, somewhat translucent hard wax with a wide range of melting or softening temperatures. Paraffin wax flakes when trimmed
and does not produce a smooth, glossy surface. Microcrystalline
wax, derived from heavier petroleum fractions, has a higher melting point, crystallizes in small plates, and is tougher and more flexible than paraffn waxes. Gum dammar, a natural resin, improves the
smoothness in the molding of paraffin-based wax and renders the
wax resistant to cracking and flaking. Carnauba wax, a very hard
wax with an agreeable odor from carnauba palm trees, has a relatively high melting point that decreases the flow of the paraffin at
mouth temperature and improves the glossiness of the wax surface.
Certain synthetic waxes can be used in place of carnauba wax.
They include a nitrogen derivative of the higher fatty acids or esters of
acids derived from Montan wax. Candelilla wax is a plant-based wax
that has the same effect as carnauba wax with a lower melting point.
Ceresin is extracted from ozokerite, a waxy mineral mixture with a
somewhat unpleasant odor. Ceresin may replace part of the paraffin
to modify the toughness and carving characteristics of the wax.

Types of Dental Waxes
Dental waxes can be classified into one of three types by the application: pattern wax, processing wax, and impression wax. In this section,
we discuss relevant properties critical to the intended applications.

Pattern Wax
Pattern waxes are used to form the outline of a prosthesis, which
is to be constructed of a more durable material such as cast alloys,
hot-isostatically pressed ceramics, or compression molded resins.
They include inlay wax, casting wax, and baseplate wax.
Inlay waxes may be softened over a flame or in water at 54 to
60 °C to enable their flow in the liquid state and their adaptation to the prepared tooth (direct technique that is no longer common) or die (indirect technique). Type I is a direct technique wax,
and type II is an indirect technique wax (ANSI/ADA Specification
No. 4 [1983]). Before the adaptation of the pattern wax within a
tooth or a die, a separating medium must be used to ensure the
complete separation of the wax pattern without distortion.
Dipping wax, which is kept molten during the process, can be
used to facilitate the wax-pattern preparation. A well-lubricated die is

CHAPTER 13

immersed in this wax briefly, and the wax coating is uniform in thickness when cooled to room temperature. After the pattern is removed
from the prepared cavity, the pattern is encased in a gypsum- or phosphate-based material or other type of refractory material known as
an investment. The role of the investment in obtaining a casting that
fits the preparation is discussed in Chapter 14, Investment Materials.
Because of the extremely high thermal expansion coefficient
value compared with those for other dental materials, the type I
inlay wax will shrink appreciably as it is cooled to room temperature. A pattern made by the indirect method may not shrink
as much, although the amount depends on whether the pattern
has reached room temperature before it is removed from the die.
Casting waxes serve the same purpose as inlay wax but are used
to make patterns for the metallic framework of removable partial
dentures and other similar structures that include sculpting and
buildup. They come in sheets, pearls, and a variety of ready-made
forms, such as round, half-round, and half-pear-shaped rods and
wires of various gauges. Most casting waxes contain no synthetic
material and have more high-molecular-weight molecules; this
allows the wax to have excellent sculpting characteristics, quick
cooling down, and the ability to remain opaque even in the molten state to lend better control during wax-up.
Baseplate wax is used to establish the initial arch form in the
construction of complete dentures. Supplied in 1- to 2-mm-thick
red or pink sheets, they come in three types for specific applications. Type I, a soft wax, is used for building contours and veneers.
Type II, a medium wax, is designed for pattern production in
the mouth in normal climatic conditions. Type III, a hard wax,
is used for trial fitting in the mouth in tropical climates (ANSI/
ADA Specification No. 24 [1991: Reaffirmed 2003]). The classifications of baseplate wax described in ISO 15854:2021 are Type 2/
Class 1: Soft, Type 2/Class 2: Hard, and Type 2/Class 3: Extra
hard. Because residual stress is present within the wax from contouring and manipulating the wax, the finished denture pattern
should be flasked as soon as possible after the completion of all
adjustments and manipulations.

Processing Wax
The role of processing waxes is primarily in simplifying the dental
procedures for constructing a variety of devices and appliances, in
the clinics or in the laboratory.
Utility wax is a moldable wax that can adhere to various dry surfaces when pressed on. This wax transforms a standard perforated
impression tray for use with hydrocolloids into a more desirable
contour and protects soft tissue from the periphery to extend or
post dam impression trays. Utility wax can be used to repair small
imperfections in wax patterns, to fill holes, or to apply sprues to
sprue bases (Chapter 14, Sprue Position and Attachment).
Sticky wax is an orange-colored wax in the form of stick, which
is tacky when melted but firm and brittle when cooled. Sticky
waxes are used to temporarily fasten gypsum model components,
join and temporarily stabilize the components of a bridge before
soldering, or attach pieces of a broken denture prior to a repair.
Boxing wax is intended for enclosing an impression before a
stone cast is poured. Typically provided in pink-colored flat sheets,
this wax is relatively soft and pliable and can easily be pressed to
the desired contour around the perimeter of an impression and
self-sealed at the overlapped area with firm pressure.
Impression Wax
The impression waxes, also referred to as bite waxes or corrective
waxes, tend to distort if they are withdrawn from undercut areas.
Thus they are limited to use in edentulous sites of the mouth or in

Auxiliary Materials

303

occlusal surface areas. Nonetheless, they have enough body to register the detail of soft tissues, and they are rigid at room temperature.

Properties of Wax
Of the three types of waxes discussed, the sensitivity of the wax
to the surrounding environment and the intrinsic properties is
critical to the application of pattern waxes. Therefore the properties discussed in this section address the requirements of pattern
waxes. The desired properties of pattern waxes are as follows:
1. The wax should be uniform when softened.
2. The color should contrast with die materials or prepared teeth
to facilitate proper finishing of the margins.
3. The wax should not fragment into flakes or similar surface
particles during carving after cooling.
4. The wax must not be pulled away by the instrument or chip
during carving.
5. During the burnout phase, the wax must burn completely by
oxidizing residual carbon to volatile gases. Ideally, the wax should
not leave a solid residue that amounts to more than 0.10% of the
original weight of the specimen after the burnout phase.

Flow of Dental Wax
Flow, by definition, is a measure of the degree of permanent deformation of the material at a given temperature below the melting temperature of the wax. We use type I inlay wax to discuss the significance of
flow property. When a wax pattern is to be made with type I inlay wax,
the wax must have a relatively high flow a few degrees above mouth
temperature so that the wax is workable but not uncomfortably warm
when placed in the mouth of the patient. At mouth temperature, the
same wax must have essentially no flow to minimize the possibility
of distortion of the pattern during removal from the tooth preparation. The temperature–time cooling curve of a paraffin-based inlay
wax (Figure 13-26) features two inflections; the upper one indicates
hardening of the wax below 65 °C and becoming solid below around
48 °C. They do not show the precise melting range of the wax but
indicate the successive solidification of progressively lower-molecularweight fractions. This condition promotes moldability of the wax.
Flow is measured by subjecting cylindrical specimens to a
designated load at the stated temperature and measuring the percentage of reduction in height. Requirements for the flow properties of inlay waxes at specific temperatures are summarized in
Table 13-13. The low flow value at 37 °C permits carving and
removal of the pattern from the prepared cavity at mouth temperature without distortion. A flow range of 70% to 90% for type
I and type II inlay waxes at 45 °C facilitates flow into all areas in
the preparation and reproduction of details on the wax pattern.
Thermal Properties of Dental Waxes
Waxes are softened with heat, forced on the prepared tooth or
the die, and cooled. The thermal conductivity of the waxes is low,
and sufficient time must be allowed both to heat them uniformly
throughout and to cool them to body or room temperature, as
with impression compounds. Another thermal characteristic
of wax is its high coefficient of thermal expansion. As shown in
Figure 13-27, the inlay wax may expand as much as 0.7% with
a 20 °C increase in temperature or contract as much as 0.35%
when it is cooled from 37 to 25 °C. The effect of low thermal
conductivity and high thermal contraction is less significant when
the wax is used in the indirect technique because the pattern is not
subjected to a change from mouth to room temperature.
The thermal dimensional change may be affected by the previous manipulation of the wax. Figure 13-27 shows the thermal

304

PA RT I V

TABLE 13-13

Fabrication of Prostheses

Requirements for Inlay Casting Wax Flow (%)
Type of Wax

ANSI/ADA Spec. No. 4
(1983; Reaffirmed
2003)

T = 30 °C

T = 37 °C

ISO 15854:2021

Max.

Max.

Min.

Max.

Min.

Max.

Type I

Type 1, Class 2

—

1.0

—

20.0

70.0

90.0

Type II

Type 1, Class 1

1.0

—

50.0

—

70.0

90.0

T = 45 °C

expansion of two wax specimens as a function of temperature;
curve A is the specimen that has previously cooled under pressure,
whereas curve B is the specimen that cooled free of pressure. Both
curves show a greater expansion rate above 35 °C. Recall from the
discussion in Chapter 2, Thermal Properties, that the temperature where this characteristic change occurs is known as the glasstransition temperature (Figure 2-28). The deviation between the
two curves occurs because specimen A had yielded more crystalline structure under pressure that exhibits a greater rate of expansion while passing through the glass-transition zone.

65

60

55
Temperature (°C)

T = 40 °C

50

CRITICAL QUESTION
45

How can one best minimize the potential distortion effects associated with
elastic memory and temperature changes?

40

35

30
0

10

20

30

40

Time (min)

• Figure 13-26 Time–temperature cooling curve for type I inlay wax.

0.7

A

Thermal expansion (%)

0.6
0.5
B

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Mechanical Properties
The weak intermolecular bonds of dental waxes that afford the
dental profession all the ease of manipulation and convenience
of the intended applications also yield a material of low elastic
modulus and associated mechanical properties that are sensitive to
temperature compared with those of other dental materials. This
is a major limitation of wax.
Residual Stress and Wax Distortion
Distortion of wax patterns can occur when forming and removing the pattern from a tooth or die. Distortion of a wax pattern
can result from occluded air in the pattern, physical deformation
(during molding, carving, or removal), release of stresses “trapped”
during previous cooling, excessive storage time, and extreme temperature changes during storage.
Because of low thermal conductivity, the outer layer of the wax
cools first while the core remains in a liquid state and continues
to contract. When the core finally cools to a solid, the contraction
process is constrained by the already-solid external layers, resulting
in residual stress. A newly made wax pattern not retained on the
die tends to change its shape over time, a sign of stress relieving
to reach a state of dimensional stability. Thus it is important that
the wax pattern be retained on the die for several hours to avoid
distortion and ensure that equilibrium conditions are established.
A casting will fit most accurately when the pattern is invested
immediately after its removal from the preparation or the die. Any
delay in investing the pattern can lead to a distortion of its form
because of stress-relaxation effects.

Manipulation of Inlay Wax

0
20

25

30

35

40

Temperature (°C)

• Figure 13-27 Thermal expansion of inlay wax. Curve A represents the
thermal expansion when the wax was held under pressure while it was
cooling from the liquid state. When the same wax is cooled without pressure and heated again, the behavior shown by curve B occurs.

To preserve their properties, dental waxes must be warmed homogeneously but not over a prolonged time. Dry heat is preferred to the
use of a water bath to avoid incorporating water. To fabricate indirect
patterns on a die, the die should be lubricated. The melted wax may
be added in layers with a spatula or a waxing instrument. When the
margins are being carved, care should be taken to avoid abrading any

CHAPTER 13

surface of the stone die. A silk or other fine cloth may be used for a
final polishing of the pattern, rubbing toward the margins.
Waxes are thermoplastic polymers that tend to return partially
toward their original shape after manipulation over time. This is
known as elastic memory, as illustrated in Figure 13-28. When
wax is bent into a horseshoe, the molecules in the inner bend are
under compression, and those in the outer bend are in tension.
Once the stresses are gradually relieved at room temperature, the
wax tends to recover its elastic strain. However, some clinicians
prefer to apply finger pressure as the wax is cooling to help fill

A

Auxiliary Materials

305

the cavity and prevent distortion during cooling. The fingers also
accelerate the cooling rate. Although temperature changes should
be avoided, some technicians prefer to repeatedly remelt small
areas along the margins and examine them under a low-power
microscope.
Regardless of the method chosen, the most practical method
for avoiding any possible delayed distortion is to invest the pattern immediately after removal from the mouth or die, as noted
earlier. Once the investment hardens (sets), the mission of the wax
pattern is accomplished.

B

• Figure 13-28 A, A stick of inlay wax is bent into the shape of a horseshoe and floated on water at room
temperature. B, After 24 hours, the same stick of wax relaxes and becomes distorted.

Suggested Readings
Bailey JH, Donovan TE, Preston JD: The dimensional accuracy of
improved dental stone, silver-plated, and epoxy resin die materials,
J Prosthet Dent 59:307–310, 1988.
Silver-plated and epoxy resin die systems were found to be acceptable
alternatives to the improved dental stones.
Balkenhol MS, Haunschild S, Lochnit G, et al: Surfactant release from
hydrophilized vinylpolysiloxanes, J Dent Res 88:668–672, 2009.
Water droplets placed on the hydrophilized VPS absorbed surfactant
from the VPS reduced the surface tension of the water droplet. It
resulted in lower contact angle over time; surface properties of the
VPS did not change.
Barnes HA: Thixotropy—a review, J Non-Newton Fluid 70:1–33, 1997.
This review article describes in detail the thixotropic phenomenon
with examples of thixotropic systems.
Bradna P, Cerna D: Impact of water quality on setting of irreversible
hydrocolloid impression materials, J Prosthet Dent 96:443–448, 2006.
The use of tap water with high water hardness accelerated setting of
alginate impression as opposed to the use of distilled water.
Brukl CE, McConnell RM, Norling BK, et al: Influence of gauging water
composition on dental stone expansion and setting time, J Prosthet
Dent 51:218–223, 1984.
This study investigated the influence of water purity on the setting of
dental stones. It confirmed that a slurry of fine gypsum particles is the
most effective accelerator but showed that solutions of supernatant
have no significant influence on the setting of dental stone.
Craig RG, Eick JD, Peyton FA: Strength properties of waxes at various temperatures and their practical application, J Dent Res 46:300–305, 1967.
Properties of waxes are controlled by the composition and melting
range of certain components.

Ivanovski S, Savage NW, Brockhurst PJ, et al: Disinfection of dental
stone casts: Antimicrobial effects and physical property alterations,
Dent Mater 11:19–23, 1995.
This article shows that the incorporation of disinfectant in mixing
water affects setting time, setting expansion, compressive strength,
and detail reproduction; it delayed expansion of the stone, but the
changes observed were within the specification limit. Casts poured
from contaminated alginate impression showed antimicrobial effects
depending on the disinfectant used.
Kulkarni MM, Thombare RU: Dimensional changes of alginate dental
impression materials–an in vitro study, Clin Diagn 9:98–102, 2015.
Maintenance of temperature and humidity play key role during storage and transport to prevent distortion. But the study suggests immediate pouring which will minimize the distortion.
McMillan LC, Darvell BW: Rheology of dental waxes, Dent Mater
16(5):337–350, 2000.
Waxes were shown to be pseudoplastic and did not display a yield
point. The pseudoplasticity followed a power law whose exponent was
temperature dependent in a complex manner. A standardized viscosity
number was defined to characterize the flow behavior of dental waxes.
The reciprocal of the pseudoplasticity parameter provides a similarly
convenient measure of the stress-sensitivity of the wax.
Yap AU, Yap SH, Teo JC, et al: Microwave drying of high strength dental
stone: Effects on dimensional accuracy, Oper Dent 28:193–199, 2003.
This study shows that there was no significant difference in percentage weight loss from specimens that were either air dried for 24 h or
microwaved at each time interval. Significant differences in dimensional change were observed between specimens microwaved at higher
energy levels with shorter duration, and those air dried for 24 h.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Suggested Readings (Web Version)
Impression Materials
Abdelraouf RM: Chemical analysis and microstructure examination of
extended-pour alginate impression versus conventional one (characterization of dental extended-pour alginate), Int J Polym Mater
67:612–618, 2018.
The extended-pour dental alginate showed higher calcium/sodium
ratio, lower organic content, and higher powder:water ratio than the
conventional one, which may contribute to increasing its dimensional
stability. On the other hand, the functional groups and the microstructure did not show variation between both alginate types.
Balkenhol MS, Haunschild S, Lochnit G, et al: Surfactant release
from hydrophilized vinylpolysiloxanes, J Dent Res 88:668–672,
2009.
Water droplets placed on the hydrophilized VPS absorbed surfactant
from the VPS reduced the surface tension of the water droplet. It
resulted in lower contact angle over time; surface properties of the
VPS did not change.
Barnes HA: Thixotropy—a review, J Non-Newton Fluid 70:1–33, 1997.
This review article describes in detail the thixotropic phenomenon
with examples of thixotropic systems.
Batchelor JM, Todd PM: Allergic contact stomatitis caused by a polyether
dental impression material, Contact Derm 63:296–297, 2010.
Bertolo MVL, de Oliveira Tomaselli L, Vitti RP, et al: Accuracy of partially edentulous arch impressions obtained from different alginates
and storage times, Braz J Oral Sci 15:252–257, 2016.
The study concluded that the alginate impressions investigated could
be stored for up to 5 days.
Blatz MB, Sadan A, Burgess JO, et al: Selected characteristics of a new
polyvinyl siloxane impression material: A randomized clinical trial,
Quintessence Int 36:97–104, 2005.
Hydrophilized PVS impression material provided a significantly
higher proportion of impressions free of bubbles and voids than the
non-hydrophilized PVS.
Boening KW, Walter MH, Schuette U: Clinical significance of surface
activation of silicone impression materials, J Dent 26:447–452, 1998.
This study shows no significant correlation between sulcus reproduction and free surface energy or between quality ranking and free surface energy.
Bradna P, Cerna D: Impact of water quality on setting of irreversible
hydrocolloid impression materials, J Prosthet Dent 96:443–448,
2006.
The use of tap water with high water hardness accelerated setting of
alginate impression as opposed to the use of distilled water.
Chai J, Pang I-C: A study of the “thixotropic” property of elastomeric
impression materials, Int J Prosthodont 7:155–158, 1994.
The study shows shear thinning does not have a lasting effect on the
viscosity of vinyl polysiloxane, polyether, or polysulfide.
Chen SY, Liang WM, Chen FN: Factors affecting the accuracy of elastomeric impression materials, J Dent 32:603–609, 2004.
This study evaluates the effects of storage times and the proportion of
inorganic filler on the accuracy and stability of elastomeric impression
materials.
Craig RG: Review of dental impression materials, Adv Dent Res 2:51–64,
1988.
This article reviews published works from 1975 to 1986. Advances
during the period included disinfection solutions, the agar/alginate
technique, dustless alginate, new formulations of polyether and PVS,
elimination of hydrogen gas from PVS, the static mixing of PVS, and
hydrophilization of PVS.
Davis BA, Powers JM: Effect of immersion disinfection on properties of
impression materials, J Prosthodont 3:31–34, 1994.
Two 30-min cycles of disinfection in 2% acid-potentiated glutaraldehyde reduced wettability but had little effect on the dimensional
change of addition silicones and polyethers.
Grundke K, Michel S, Knispel G, et al: Wettability of silicone and polyether impression materials: Characterization by surface tension and
305.e1

contact angle measurements, Colloids Surf A: Physicochem 317:598–
609, 2008.
The decrease of the water contact angle was directly related to the
decrease in the liquid surface tension of the water droplet during
spreading. The migration of the surfactant to the outermost surface
was increasingly hindered with the progression of the polymerization
and cross-linking process.
Hosseinpour D, Berg JC: The dynamic interaction of water with four dental impression materials during cure, J Prosthodont 18:292–300, 2009.
All materials investigated in the fresh, uncured state showed qualitative decomposition, such as formation of a crater and a scum of material at its surface, from interaction with probing water. These effects
diminished with curing time until, beyond a critical value, no effects
were evident. The initial hydrophilicity was highest for polyether.
Beyond the critical curing time, different degrees of hydrophilicity
were observed, with Aquasil showing the lowest final contact angle.
Kim K-N, Craig RG, Koran A: Viscosity of monophase addition silicones
as a function of shear rate, J Prosthet Dent 67:794–798, 1992.
All products showed a 6- to 10-fold decrease in viscosity with an
increasing shear rate (shear thinning).
Klooster J, Logan GI, Tjan AHL: Effects of strain rate on the behavior of
elastomeric impressions, J Prosthet Dent 66:292–298, 1991.
This study reported that (1) polysulfide exhibited the greatest deformation with the lowest tensile strengths; (2) higher strain rates
yielded higher tensile strength; and (3) polysulfides showed the
greatest elongation at rupture, with the highest values for higher
strain rates.
Kulkarni MM, Thombare RU: Dimensional changes of alginate dental impression materials—an in vitro study, J Clin Diagn 9:98–
102, 2015.
Maintenance of temperature and humidity play key role during storage and transport to prevent distortion. But the study suggests immediate pouring which will minimize the distortion.
Lim K-C, Chong Y-H, Soh G: Effect of operator variability on void formation in impressions made with an automixed addition silicone,
Aust Dent J 37:35–38, 1992.
Automixing produced substantially fewer voids than hand mixing. There was a significant difference in the number of voids in the
impressions made by the two operators.
Lu H, Nguyen B, Powers JM: Mechanical properties of 3 hydrophilic
addition silicone and polyether elastomeric impression materials,
J Prosthet Dent 92:151–154, 2004.
The study shows that a new “soft” polyether impression material had
higher strain in compression and lower tensile strength compared to
new “hydrophilic” addition silicone materials.
Martinez JE, Combe EC, Pesun IJ: Rheological properties of vinyl polysiloxane impression pastes, Dent Mater 17:471–476, 2001.
Both PVS materials investigated in the study exhibited thixotropic
properties.
Martins F, Branco P, Reis J, et al: Dimensional stability of two impression
materials after a 6-month storage period, Acta Biomater Odontol Scand
3:84–91, 2017.
One polyether and one PVS were stored at 23 °C for 6 months and
exhibited dimensional changes below the maximum permitted by the
ISO 4823:2000.
McCabe JF, Carrick TE: Recording surface detail on moist surfaces
with elastomeric impression materials, Eur J Prosthodont Restor Dent
14:42–46, 2006.
It was concluded that the more hydrophilic nature of the polyether
and hybrid materials enabled them to record more accurate impressions of moist surfaces, particularly in areas of difficult access such as
deep grooves.
McCormick JT, Antony SJ, Dial ML, et al: Wettability of elastomeric
impression materials: Effect of selected surfactants, Int J Prosthodont
2:413–420, 1989.
There are two distinct groups of impression materials classified by surface wettability: agar, alginate, and polyether are hydrophilic, while
polysulfide and silicone (not hydrophilized) are more hydrophobic.

Menees TS, Radhakrishnan R, Ramp LC, et al: Contact angle of unset
elastomeric impression materials, J Prosthet Dent 114:536–542, 2015.
The contact angle by water increased in the order of modified PVS,
polyether and then traditional PVS. The hybrid materials were not
consistent. Saliva behaves differently from water on these materials.
Norling BK, Reisbick MH: The effect of nonionic surfactants on bubble entrapment in elastomeric impression materials, J Prosthet Dent
42:342–347, 1979.
The incorporation of nonionic surfactants into silicone and polysulfide elastomers increases their wettability by gypsum products and
results in fewer bubbles in poured casts.
Pandey P, Mantri S, Bhasin A, et al: Mechanical properties of a new vinyl
polyether silicone in comparison to vinyl polysiloxane and polyether
elastomeric impression materials, Contemp Clin Dent 10:203–207,
2019.
A combination of vinyl polysiloxane (VPS) and polyether (PE) elastomers called “polyvinyl ether silicone” is shown to be more flexible
with high tensile energy.
Penfold RdRS, Brandt WC, Miranda ME, et al: Evaluation of dimensional stability and details reproduction of alginate molds storage in
different times and temperature, Braz Dent Sci 21:37–43, 2018.
Pratten DH, Novetsky M: Detail reproduction of soft tissue: A comparison of impression materials, J Prosthet Dent 65:188–191, 1991.
Polyether and hydrophilized addition silicone were judged best in
detail reproduction and ZOE and polysulfide low-viscosity materials
were judged worst in this regard. Voids were minimized with lowviscosity polysulfide and ZOE relative to addition silicones.
Re D, De Angelis F, Augusti G, et al: Mechanical properties of elastomeric
impression materials: An in vitro comparison, Int J Dent 4(4282861-8),
2015.
The light-body vinylpolyether silicone showed high tensile strength,
yield strength, and adequate strain at yield/brake.
Rupp FD, Axmann D, Jacobi A, et al: Hydrophilicity of elastomeric nonaqueous impression materials during setting, Dent Mater 21:94–102,
2005.
Real time observation shows that contact angle on nonaqueous elastomeric impression material decreases rapidly during setting. The rate of
reduction is faster with hydrophilized PVS.
Salem NS, Combe EC, Watts DC: Mechanical properties of elastomeric
impression materials, J Oral Rehab 15:125–132, 1988
This study investigated four elastomeric impression materials. The
polysulfide had the greatest resistance to tear, but the elastic modulus
and tensile strength were less than that of the other three materials.
Sinjari B, D’Addazio G, Xhajanka E, et al: Penetration of different
impression materials into exposed dentinal tubules during the impression procedure, Materials (Basel) 13(13211-10), 2020.
The study shows that the impression materials can penetrate and
remain entrapped inside the dentinal tubules during the impression
procedures. This aspect might have a negative influence on the adhesion, and thus this study strongly supports the use of an immediate
dentine sealing procedure for adhesive restorations.
Sydiskis RK, Gerhardt DE: Cytotoxicity of impression materials, J Prosthet Dent 69:431–435, 1993.
Comparison of cell cytotoxicity and cell viability for seven types
of impression materials showed that polyether exhibited the most
adverse effects in both categories.
Takahashi H, Finger WJ: Dentin surface reproduction with hydrophilic
and hydrophobic impression materials, Dent Mater 7:197–201, 1991
No difference was found in the detail reproduction of the dentin surface by either type of PVS. It was concluded that the surface tension of
PVS before complete setting is lower than that of the dentin surface;
therefore PVS, regardless of hydrophobicity, will spread on wet dentin.
von Berg GB: Accuracy of polyether vs plaster impressions for long-span
implant supported prostheses. MSc Thesis: Johannesburg; 2007.
University of the Witwatersrand. This study shows that for polyether
impressions, the use of plaster resulted in smaller inter-abutment error
but with less predictable variance in dimensions.

Wassell RW, Ibbetson RJ: The accuracy of polyvinyl siloxane impressions made with standard and reinforced stock trays, J Prosthet Dent
645:748–757, 1992.
Using stock trays, the heavy-body/light-body combination was superior to the putty-wash impression made with the addition silicone.
Webber RL, Ryge G: The determination of tear energy of extensible
materials of dental interest, J Biomed Mater Res 2:281–296, 1968.
An equation was used that takes dimensional change of the test specimen into consideration in calculating tear energy.
Gypsum Products
Adrien J, Meille S, Tadier S, et al: In-situ x-ray tomographic monitoring
of gypsum plaster setting, Cem Concr Res 82:107–116, 2016.
Bailey JH, Donovan TE, Preston JD: The dimensional accuracy of
improved dental stone, silver-plated, and epoxy resin die materials, J Prosthet Dent 59:307–310, 1988.
Silver-plated and epoxy resin die systems were found to be acceptable
alternatives to the improved dental stones.
Berg E, Nielsen O, Skaug N: High-level microwave disinfection of dental
gypsum casts, Int J Prosthodont 18:520–525, 2005.
Microwave treatment was capable of eliminating microorganisms on
gypsum casts, whereas casts poured from disinfected alginate impressions were not free of microorganisms.
Brukl CE, McConnell RM, Norling BK, et al: Influence of gauging
water composition on dental stone expansion and setting time,
J Prosthet Dent 51:218–223, 1984.
This study investigated the influence of water purity on the setting of
dental stones. It confirmed that a slurry of fine gypsum particles is the
most effective accelerator but showed that solutions of supernatant
have no significant influence on the setting of dental stone.
Chan TKC, Darvell BW: Effect of storage conditions on calcium sulphate
hemihydrate-containing products, Dent Mater 17:134–141, 2001.
This article shows that at a relative humidity less than 70%, it would
take in excess of 1000 h of exposure before reaction within the gypsum products began. There is no evidence to suggest that there is a safe
humidity level for exposure.
Chidambaranathan AS, Balasubramanium M: Comprehensive review
and comparison of the disinfection techniques currently available in
the literature, J Prosthodon 28:849–856, 2019.
Dilts WE, Duncanson MG Jr, Collard EW: Comparative stability of cast
mounting materials, J Okla Dent Assoc 68:11–13, 1978.
Certain properties of mounting gypsum products are cited, particularly their low-setting expansion.
Hapsari ML, Irawan B, Damiyanti M: Influence of shelf life on the setting time of type IV gypsum, J Phys Conf Ser 84(1-5):012094, 2017.
Gypsum products pass expiration date exhibits longer setting time.
Ivanovski S, Savage NW, Brockhurst PJ, et al: Disinfection of dental
stone casts: Antimicrobial effects and physical property alterations, Dent Mater 11:19–23, 1995.
This article shows that the incorporation of disinfectant in mixing
water affects setting time, setting expansion, compressive strength,
and detail reproduction; it delayed expansion of the stone, but the
changes observed were within the specification limit. Casts poured
from contaminated alginate impression showed antimicrobial effects
depending on the disinfectant used.
Jørgensen KD: Studies on the setting of plaster of Paris, Odontol Tidskr
61:304–346, 1953.
The porosity of set gypsum was calculated as a function of W/P ratio.
The higher the ratio, the greater the porosity.
Kuntze RA: The Chemistry and Technology of Gypsum, Philadelphia, 1984.
American Society for Testing and Materials; STP 861.
This is an excellent reference on the basic chemistry and technological
aspects of gypsum.
Lautenschlager EP, Harcourt JK, Ploszaj LC: Setting reactions of gypsum
materials investigated by x-ray diffraction, J Dent Res 48:43–48, 1969.
This article demonstrates the conversion of the hemihydrate to the
dihydrate of calcium sulfate.

305.e2

Lewry AJ, Williamson J: The setting of gypsum plaster, J Mater Sci
29:5279–5284, 1994.
The article describes the reaction occurring in three steps: Dissolution,
nucleation, and precipitation, as well as completion associated with
depletion of reactants.
Lucas MG, Arioli-Filho JN, Nogueira SS, et al: Effect of incorporation
of disinfectant solutions on setting time, linear dimensional stability,
and detail reproduction in dental stone casts, J Prosthodont 18:521–
526, 2009.
This article shows that addition of sodium hypochlorite significantly
alters, adversely, all of the evaluated properties. However, the addition
of glutaraldehyde and chlorhexidine induces no significant changes in
the evaluated properties.
Mahler DB, Ady AB: Explanation for the hygroscopic setting expansion
of dental gypsum products, J Dent Res 39:578–589, 1960.
This is a classic study that best defines the mechanics of hygroscopic
expansion.
Proença JDS, Suzuki MM, da Costa SC, et al: Influence of different water
types on the physical and mechanical properties of gypsum, Braz J
Oral Sci 14:199–203, 2015.
The type of water, slurry, mineral, or distilled water study exhibits no
statistical difference in physical and mechanical properties.
Vyas R, Vaddamanu SK, Gurumurthy V, et al: Variations in the compressive strength of a die stone with three different sulfates at eight
different concentrations: An in vitro study, J Contemp Dent Pract
20:1297–1306, 2019.
Chemical additives such as sulfate salts may increase the CS such
that the die stone can withstand clinical and laboratory handling
forces.
Yap AU, Yap SH, Teo JC, et al: Microwave drying of high strength
dental stone: Effects on dimensional accuracy, Oper Dent 28:193–
199, 2003.
This study shows that there was no significant difference in percentage
weight loss from specimens that were either air dried for 24 h or microwaved at each time interval. Significant differences in dimensional
change were observed between specimens microwaved at higher energy
levels with shorter duration, and those air dried for 24 h.

305.e3

Dental Wax
Baum L, Phillips RW, Lund MR: Textbook of Operative Dentistry, ed, 3,
Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders.
Techniques for manipulating wax and forming the pattern are described.
Craig RG, Eick JD, Peyton FA: Strength properties of waxes at various
temperatures and their practical application, J Dent Res 46:300–
305, 1967.
Properties of waxes are controlled by the composition and melting
range of certain components.
Kotsiomiti E, McCabe JF: Stability of dental waxes following repeated
heatings, J Oral Rehabil 22:135–143, 1995.
The flow and strength properties of dental waxes were examined following excessive and repeated heating. Repeated exposure of dental
waxes to temperatures higher than 200 °C may affect the composition
and properties, resulting in inferior materials.
McMillan LC, Darvell BW: Rheology of dental waxes, Dent Mater
16:337–350, 2000.
Waxes were shown to be pseudoplastic and did not display a yield
point. The pseudoplasticity followed a power law whose exponent was
temperature dependent in a complex manner. A standardized viscosity
number was defined to characterize the flow behavior of dental waxes.
The reciprocal of the pseudoplasticity parameter provides a similarly
convenient measure of the stress-sensitivity of the wax.
Michalakis KX, Kapsampeli V, Kitsou A, et al: Marginal adaptation of
four inlay casting waxes on stone, titanium, and zirconia dies, J Prosthet Dent 112:70–78, 2014.
A significant correlation was found between the marginal accuracy
and the contact angle values. As the contact angle value became
smaller, the marginal accuracy improved.
Taha D, Nour M, Zohdy M, et al: The effect of different wax pattern
fabrication techniques on the marginal fit of customized lithium disilicate implant abutments, J Prosthodont 28:1018–1023, 2019.
Wax patterns for pressing lithium disilicate abutments were made by CAD/
CAM milling, 3D printing, and conventional layering. The conventional
layering pattern and resultant pressed prostheses exhibits the best fit to the
titanium insert among the three methods of fabricating wax patterns.

