3

Physical and Chemical Properties
of Solids
OUTLINE
Rheology

Electrochemical Properties

Structural Relaxation

Magnetic Materials

Thermal Properties

KEY TERMS
Dilatant Resistance to flow increases as the rate of deformation
(shear strain rate) increases. The more rapidly dilatant fluids are
stirred or forced through a syringe, the more viscous (thicker)
and more resistant to flow they become.
Pseudoplastic Viscous character that is opposite from dilatant
behavior in which the rate of flow decreases with increasing
strain rate until it reaches a nearly constant value. Thus the
more rapidly pseudoplastic fluids are stirred or forced through
a syringe, the less viscous (thinner) and more easily they flow.
Rheology Study of the deformation and flow characteristics of
matter (see viscosity).
Thixotropic Property of gels and other fluids to become less
viscous and flow when subjected to steady shear forces through
being shaken, stirred, squeezed, patted, or vibrated. When the
shear force is decreased to zero, the viscosity increases to the
original value over a short time delay.
Viscosity Resistance of a fluid to flow (see rheology).

Opacity The extent to which light does not pass through a material.
No image and no light can be seen through an opaque object.
Reflection The amount of light that reflects from the surface of an
object.
Refract/Refraction The degree to which light is bent when
it passes from one medium to another. This makes a spoon
appear bent in a glass of drinking water when light passes
from air through glass into water, reflects from the spoon, and
then passes back through water and glass into air. The index of
refraction is a measure of this effect.
Translucency Property of an object in which light is scattered as it
passes through, revealing a diffuse image.
Transmit/Transmission The amount of light passing through an
object.
Transparency The extent to which light passes through a material
and to which an undistorted image can be seen through it.
Value Relative lightness or darkness of a color. Also known as
luminous reflectance and the gray scale.

STRUCTURAL RELAXATION

THERMAL PROPERTIES

Creep Time-dependent plastic strain of a solid under a static load
or constant stress.
Sag Irreversible (plastic) deformation of metal frameworks of fixed
dental prostheses in the firing temperature range of ceramic veneers.

Coefficient of thermal expansion (linear coefficient of
expansion) Change in length per unit of the original length of
a material when its temperature is raised by 1 K.
Kelvin (K) The kelvin (K) temperature scale extends the degree
Celsius scale such that zero degrees K is defined as absolute
zero (= −273.15 °C). Temperatures on this scale are called
“kelvins, ” not “ degrees kelvin,” kelvin is not capitalized, and
the symbol (capital K) stands alone with no degree symbol;
1 K = 1 °C, K = °C + 273.15.
Thermal conductivity (coefficient of thermal
conductivity) Property that describes the thermal energy
transport in watts per second through a material 1 cm thick
with a cross-sectional area of 1 cm2 when the temperature
differential between the surfaces of the material perpendicular
to the heat flow is 1 K.
Thermal diffusivity Measure of the speed with which a
temperature change will proceed through an object when one
surface is heated.

RHEOLOGY

COLOR AND OPTICAL EFFECTS
Absorption The extent to which light is absorbed by the material
in an object.
Chroma Degree of saturation of a particular hue (dominant color).
Color Sensation induced from light of varying wavelengths that
reaches the eye.
Esthetics Principles and techniques associated with the
development of the color and appearance required to produce
a natural, pleasing effect in the dentition.
Hue Dominant color of an object (e.g., red, green, or blue).
Metamerism Phenomenon in which the color of an object under
one type of light source (e.g., room light) appears to change
when illuminated by a different light source (e.g., sunlight).

49

50

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

ELECTROCHEMICAL PROPERTIES
Concentration cell Electrochemical corrosion cell in which the
potential difference is associated with the difference in concentration of a dissolved species, such as oxygen, in solution along
different areas of a metal surface. Pitting corrosion and crevice
corrosion are types of concentration cell corrosion.
Corrosion Chemical or electrochemical process in which a solid,
usually a metal, is attacked by an environmental agent, resulting
in partial or complete dissolution.
Electromotive series Arrangement of metals by their equilibrium values of electrode oxidation potential. Used to judge
the tendency of metals and alloys to undergo electrochemical
(galvanic) corrosion.
Galvanic corrosion (electrogalvanism) Accelerated attack
occurring on a less noble metal when electrochemically
dissimilar metals are in electrical contact within a liquid
corrosive environment.

Every dentist in the process of making or delivering a restoration
must select various materials to complete the task. In making
the choice, the dentist must have a thorough knowledge of the
properties and behavioral characteristics of the materials chosen,
namely, the physical and chemical properties. Physical properties are
based on the laws of mechanics, acoustics, optics, thermodynamics,
electricity, magnetism, radiation, atomic structure, and nuclear
phenomena. Chemical properties are based on the ways in which
substances interact, combine, and change at the molecular level, as
governed by their outer orbital electrons.
From the categories of dental materials and challenges
discussed in Chapter 1, there are specific behaviors of the materials
during processing and use that dentists should consider, such
as the flowability (or formability), esthetic appearance, thermal
expansion, chemical durability, and magnetism of the materials. As
examples, flow and viscosity (the resistance of a fluid to flow) are
essential properties for mixing direct restorative materials (Chapter
1, Direct Restorative Materials) and gypsum products and impression
materials (Chapter 13). Creep (slow deformation under a static
load) is relevant to the clinical performance of amalgam (Chapter 8,
Creep) and the fabrication of metal-ceramic prostheses (Chapter 10,
Requirements of Metal Component). The physical properties of color
and thermal expansion are of particular importance to the performance
of all restorations, especially for dental ceramics (Chapter 10, Physical
Properties). Tarnish and corrosion are electrochemical properties that
strongly affect the performance of metals and their alloys (Chapters 8
and 9). Magnetic-able prostheses materials are often used for retaining
implant-borne prostheses and for orthodontic tooth movement in
place. Mechanical properties, a subset of physical properties based on
the laws of mechanics, are discussed in Chapter 4.
These phenomena will be discussed in greater detail in later
chapters. However, having a firm grasp of the underlying principles
that govern the properties is critical.

Rheology
Rheology is the study of the deformation and flow characteristics
of matter under stress, whether liquid or solid. Dental professionals
must manipulate a wide variety of dental materials in a fluid state to
achieve successful clinical outcomes. Moreover, the manipulation

Galvanic shock Pain sensation caused by the electrical current
generated when two dissimilar metals are brought into contact
in the oral environment.
Stress corrosion Degradation caused by the combined effects
of mechanical stress and a corrosive environment, usually
exhibited as cracking.
Tarnish Process by which a metal surface is dulled or discolored
when a reaction with a sulfide, oxide, chloride, or other chemical
causes surface discoloration through the formation of a thin
oxidized film.

MAGNETIC MATERIALS
Magnet Metallic material in which the component atoms are so
ordered that it attracts iron-containing objects or aligns itself in
an external magnetic field.
Tesla Unit of flux density (T) of the magnetic field produced by a
magnet.

and handling of a given material in the liquid state determine
this material’s performance as a solid. Most dental materials are
initially in a fluid state so that they can be placed and shaped as
required; then they undergo transformation to a solid state, in
which they are durable and perform their function. Cements and
impression materials undergo a fluid-to-solid transformation in
the mouth. Gypsum products used in the fabrication of models
and dies are transformed extraorally from fluid slurries into solids
(see Chapter 13, Gypsum Products).
Although a liquid at rest cannot support a shear stress (shearing
force per unit shearing area), most liquids, when placed in motion,
resist imposed forces that cause them to move. This resistance to
fluid flow, termed viscosity, is controlled by internal frictional forces
within the liquid. Thus viscosity is a measure of the consistency of a
fluid and the fluid’s resistance to flow. Therefore highly viscous fluids
flow slowly. Dental materials exhibit differing viscosities depending
on their intended clinical application. In everyday life, we find wide
differences in viscosities among such fluids as water, syrup, ketchup,
moisturizing cream, and toothpaste. We will be discussing dental
materials of various viscosities in later chapters.
The concept of viscosity is illustrated in Figure 3-1. A liquid
occupies the space between two flat surfaces, such as when a spatula is moved through a pasty fluid, for example, a dental cement,
to blend two components on a mixing pad. The mixing surface
is fixed, and the upper surface (e.g., a spatula blade) moves to the
right at a given velocity (V) with sufficient force (F) to overcome

Shear force

Velocity = V

Liquid

d

Area = A

• Figure 3-1 Shear strain, ε ( = V/d) of a viscous liquid between two
plates caused by translation of the top plate at a velocity, V, relative to the
stationary lower plate. This illustrates, for example, a spatula blade mixing
dental cement on a mixing pad.

CHAPTER 3

Shear stress,

Plastic

Dilatant

Newtonian
Pseudoplastic
Strain rate,

• Figure 3-2 Shear stress versus shear strain rate for fluids exhibiting different types of rheological behaviors.

the frictional resistance within the fluid and cause the fluid to flow.
As discussed in Chapter 1, What Is Force?, stress is the force per
unit area that develops within a structure when an external force
is applied. If the two surfaces have an area (A) in contact with the
liquid, a shear stress (τ) can be defined as τ = F/A. The shear strain
rate is ε = V/d, where d is the shear distance of the upper surface
relative to the fixed lower surface, and V is the velocity of the moving surface. As the shear stress τ increases, ε increases, and a curve
can be obtained for shear stress versus strain rate.
The rheologic behaviors of four types of fluids are shown in
Figure 3-2. Curves depicting shear stress versus shear strain rate
are used to characterize the viscous behavior of fluids, and the viscosity (η) is defined as the shear stress divided by the strain rate,
η = t/ε . The straight line from the origin in Figure 3-2 shows that
the force applied is proportional to the strain rate of the fluid. This
is known as Newtonian viscosity. A Newtonian fluid has a constant
viscosity independent of the strain rate. Viscosity is measured in
units of pascal second (Pa⋅s) or centipoise (cP; 1Pa⋅s = 10,000 cP).
Pure water at 20 °C has a viscosity of 1.0 cP, whereas the viscosity
of molasses is approximately 300,000 cP (30 Pa⋅s). This value is
similar to that of tempered agar hydrocolloid impression material
(281,000 cP or 28.1 Pa⋅s at 45 °C). Of the elastomeric impression materials, light-body (“thin” consistency) polysulfide has a
viscosity of 109,000 cP (10.9 Pa⋅s), compared with 1,360,000
cP (136 Pa⋅s) for heavy-body (“thick” consistency) polysulfide at
36 °C. The viscosity of most fluids decreases rapidly with increasing temperature, which is the reason the reported values for material viscosity often include the temperature at measurement.
The viscosity of many dental materials decreases with increasing
strain rate until the viscosity reaches a nearly constant value. That
is, the faster materials are stirred, forced through a syringe, or
squeezed, the less viscous and more fluid they become. This is called
pseudoplastic viscosity and is illustrated by the change in the slope
of the plot in Figure 3-2. Liquids that show the opposite behavior
are dilatant and become more rigid as the rate of deformation (shear
strain rate) increases. That is, the faster they are stirred, squeezed,
and so forth, the more viscous and resistant to flow they become.
Some classes of materials behave like a rigid body until some
minimum value of shear stress is reached. This is represented by the
offset along the shear-stress axis. These fluids, which exhibit rigid
behavior initially and then attain constant viscosity, are referred to
as “plastic.” Ketchup is a familiar example—a sharp blow to the
bottle is usually required to produce an initial flow.

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

51

Viscosity may also depend on the previous deformation of
the liquid. Thixotropic fluids become less viscous upon repeated
applications of pressure and stay at that lower viscosity for a short
period of time before the viscosity of the previous state is regained.
Dental prophylaxis pastes, plaster of Paris, resin cements, and
some impression materials are thixotropic. The thixotropic nature
of impression materials is beneficial because the material dispensed
from the syringe will maintain a lower viscosity for a while, allowing better wetting of the tissue. The material then stops moving
when a state of higher viscosity is regained. For instance, prophylaxis paste does not flow out of a rubber cup until this is rotated
against the teeth to be cleaned. For pseudoplastic materials, the
material regains the viscosity as soon as the stressing stops.

Structural Relaxation
Structural relaxation is a rheological phenomenon of solids that
occurs so slowly that it is not noticed until the process completes.
The two categories of interest in dentistry are (1) stress relaxation
and (2) creep and flow.

Stress Relaxation
After an object or substance has been permanently deformed, a
process of shape changing by force, the atoms and molecules are
displaced and are no longer in equilibrium positions. There are
trapped internal stresses that make the structure unstable. The substance can relieve these stresses through a solid-state diffusion process driven by thermal energy, where the atoms can slowly return
to their equilibrium positions. The result is a change in the shape
or contour of the solid as the atoms or molecules change positions.
The process is known as stress relaxation and may cause warping
or distortion of the object. Such stress relaxation can occur with
elastomeric impression materials and can lead to distortions in the
impression and a subsequent lack of fit of the prostheses, as discussed in Chapter 13, Elasticity and Viscoelasticity.
The rate of relaxation increases with an increase in temperature.
For example, if a wire is bent, the wire may tend to straighten out
if it is heated to a high temperature. At room temperature, any
such relaxation caused by the rearrangement of metal atoms may
be negligible. On the other hand, there are many noncrystalline
dental materials (e.g., waxes, resins, and gels) that, when manipulated and cooled, can then undergo relaxation (with consequent
distortion) at a slightly elevated temperature.

Creep and Flow
If a solid metal is held at a temperature near this metal’s melting
point and is subjected to a constant load, the resulting strain will
increase over time. Creep is defined as the time-dependent plastic
strain of a material under a static load or constant stress. Metals for
cast restorations or metal-ceramic prostheses have melting points
(for pure metals) or melting ranges (for alloys) that are much
higher than mouth temperatures, and they are not susceptible to
creep deformation intraorally. However, some alloys used for longspan metal-ceramic bridge structures can sag under the influence
of the mass of the prosthesis at porcelain-firing temperatures. This
phenomenon is discussed further in Chapter 9, Requirements of
Alloys for Metal-Ceramic Applications.
Dental amalgams, because of their mercury content, begin
melting at temperatures a few hundred degrees above room
temperature. Because of amalgam’s low melting range, this material
can undergo creep at a restored tooth site under periodic sustained

52

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

stress, such as would be imposed by patients who clench their
teeth. Because creep produces continuing plastic deformation, the
process can, over time, be very destructive to a dental amalgam
filling. The relationship of this property to the behavior of
amalgam restorations is discussed in Chapter 8, Creep.
The term flow, rather than creep, has generally been used in
dentistry to describe the rheology of amorphous materials such
as waxes (Chapter 13, Flow of Dental Wax). The flow of wax is
a measure of the potential to deform under a small static load,
which includes its own mass. Creep or flow characteristics are
determined using a cylinder of prescribed dimensions subjected
to a given compressive load for a specified time and temperature.
The creep or flow is measured as the percentage decrease in length
that occurs under these testing conditions. Creep may cause
unacceptable deformation of dental restorations (e.g., low-copper
dental amalgam) made from a material that is used clinically at a
temperature near its melting point for an extended period.

Color and Optical Effects
Esthetic considerations in restorative and prosthetic dentistry
have received increasingly greater emphasis in recent decades,
and the challenges have grown even greater in the past few years
following the widespread use of bleaching and whitening technologies. Thus the development of a general-purpose, techniqueinsensitive, direct-filling, tooth-colored, color-stable restorative
material remains one of the more serious challenges of current
dental materials research.
Because esthetic dentistry imposes severe demands on the
artistic abilities of the dentist and technician, knowledge of the
underlying scientific principles of color and other optical effects

is essential. This is especially true for the increasingly popular
restorations that involve ceramic materials (see Chapter 10, Color
Matching Ability and Aesthetic Qualities).

Nature of Light and the Role of Human Vision
Light is electromagnetic radiation that can be detected by the
human eye. The eye is sensitive to wavelengths from approximately
400 nm (violet) to 700 nm (dark red), as shown in Figure 3-3.
For an object to be visible, this object must reflect or transmit
incident light from an external source. The incident light is usually polychromatic, that is, a mixture of the various wavelengths,
commonly known as “white” light. Incident light is selectively
absorbed or scattered (or both) at certain wavelengths. The spectral distribution of the transmitted or reflected light resembles that
of the incident light, although certain wavelengths are reduced in
magnitude.
The phenomenon of vision, and certain related terminology,
can be illustrated by considering the response of the human eye
to light reflected from an object. Light from an object that is
incident on the eye is focused in the retina and is converted into
nerve impulses, which are transmitted to the brain. The retina
has two types of cells that gather light: rods and cones. The rods
are around the outer ring of the retina and are active in dim
light. Cone-shaped cells in the retina are responsible for color
vision.
Signals from the retina are processed by the brain to produce
the psychophysiological perception of color. Because a neural
response is involved in color vision, constant stimulation by a
single color may result in color fatigue and a decrease in the
eye’s response. Defects in certain portions of the color-sensing
receptors result in the different types of color blindness; thus
Infrared

700

600
Prism

500

White
light source

Ultraviolet

400
Wavelength
(nm)

• Figure 3-3 Spectrum of visible light ranging in wavelength from 400 nm (violet) to 700 nm (red). The
most visually perceptible region of the equal energy spectrum under daylight conditions is between 540
and 570 nm, with a maximum value of visual perceptibility at 555 nm.

CHAPTER 3

humans vary greatly in their ability to distinguish colors. In a
scientific sense, one might liken the normal human eye to an
exceptionally sensitive differential colorimeter, a scientific
instrument that measures the intensities and wavelengths of
light. Although colorimeters are more precise than the human
eye in measuring slight differences in colored objects, they
are inaccurate for rough or curved surfaces. The eye is highly
sensitive in comparing two colors seen side by side, whether on
rough, smooth, flat, or curved surfaces.

The Nature of the Object Under View
Esthetics is critically important in dealing with dental restorative materials. For good esthetics, the interaction of light with restorative materials must mimic the interaction of light with natural teeth. The nature
of the restorative material, or that of any object under view, determines
how that object will appear. Electromagnetic radiation in the visible
region interacts with an object through reflection from the surface,
absorption, refraction, or transmission (i.e., by passing through
unchanged). These phenomena determine the opacity, translucency,
or transparency of an object. Light reflected from rough surfaces scatters in many directions because light is reflected at many angles by the
uneven surface. This leads to an appearance that ranges from mirrorlike
for a perfectly smooth surface (termed specular reflectance) to the flat,
dull appearance (termed diffuse reflectance) of a surface such as chalk.
The opacity of a material is related to the amount of light the
material can absorb and/or scatter. The opposite of opacity is
translucency. For example, if 1-mm thicknesses of each of two
materials absorb light passing through them, the material that

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

53

absorbs 20% of the light is less opaque and more translucent than
the material that absorbs 50%. Transparent materials are at the far
end of the translucency scale, absorb no light, and transmit 100%
of the light that passes through them.
Enamel is a composite material consisting of hydroxyapatite
crystals in a protein matrix. When light strikes enamel, some is
reflected, some refracted, some absorbed, and some transmitted.
Enamel has a refractive index of 1.65 and is translucent.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How is color described objectively and quantitatively?

Three Dimensions of Color
Verbal descriptions of color are not precise enough to describe
the appearance of teeth. For example, the definition of puce is
“a brilliant purplish-red color,” according to Microsoft’s Encarta
World English Dictionary, whereas Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary defines puce as “a dark red that is yellower and less strong
than cranberry, paler and slightly yellower than average garnet,
bluer, less strong, and slightly lighter than pomegranate, and bluer
and paler than average wine.” These definitions are too variable,
complex, and imprecise to describe a desired color of a dental
crown to a laboratory technician. Such a written description is
subjective and does not clearly and unambiguously allow someone
to perceive the color. To overcome this problem, color perception
is described by three independent and objective variables shown
in the Munsell color system: value, hue, and chroma (Figure 3-4).

L*(white)
-a*(green)
-b*(blue)

+b*(yellow)
+a*(red)

Chroma

Value

Hue
L*(black)

• Figure 3-4 The Munsell three-dimensional (3-D) color space. Yellow arrows show the three variables
of color: value, hue, and chroma. Value increases from black to white, chroma increases from the center
radially outward, and changes in hue occur in a circumferential direction. Blue arrows show the three coordinates of CIE L*a*b* axis: L* (value), a* (red-green), and b* (yellow-blue).

54

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

White

Value

9/

5PB

5P
7/
5RP

Hu
e

5B

5/2

5BG

5/6

5/10

5/14
5R
Chroma

5G
5YR
5GY

3/

5Y

/1
Black

• Figure 3-5 Munsell scale of hues, values, and chromas in the color space. (From Sakaguchi RL,
Powers JM: Craig’s Restorative Dental Materials, ed 13, St. Louis, 2012, Mosby.)

Value is also known as the gray scale and is the vertical, or z-axis,
on Figure 3-4. Value increases toward the high end (lighter) and
decreases toward the low end (darker). Value is also expressed by the
“lightness” factor, with varying levels of gray between the extremes
of white and black. Teeth and other objects can be separated into
lighter shades (higher value) and darker shades (lower value). For
example, the yellow of a lemon is lighter than the red of a cherry. For
a light-diffusing and light-reflecting object such as a tooth or dental
crown, the value identifies the lightness or darkness of a color, which
can be measured independently of the hue and chroma.
Hue is the dominant color of an object, for example, red,
green, or blue. This refers to the dominant wavelengths present in
the spectral distribution. The continuum of these hues creates the
three-dimensional (3-D) color solid shown in Figure 3-4.
Chroma is the degree of saturation of a particular hue. For
example, red can vary from “scarlet” to light pink, where scarlet
has a high saturation and pink has a low saturation. The yellow
color of a lemon is a more saturated, “vivid,” color than that of
a banana, which is a less saturated, “dull” yellow. Chroma varies
radially, perpendicular to the value axis (Figure 3-4). Colors in
the center are dull (gray). In other words, the higher the chroma,
the more intense the color. Chroma is not considered separately
in dentistry and is always associated with the hue and value of
dental tissues, restorations, and prostheses. The components of a
color space can be more easily visualized by the individual parts in
Figure 3-5, here seen as discs stacked along the value axis on a scale
of 0 to 10 from black to white. Around the periphery are 10 basic
hues (dominant wavelength/color). Chroma radiates out from the
value axis like the spokes of a wheel.
The color space can also be quantified by the CIE
(Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage) L*a*b* color space,
in which L* represents the value of an object from darker to

lighter, a* is the measurement along the red (+a*)-green (–a*)
axis, and b* is the measurement along the yellow (+b*)-blue
(–b*) axis (Figure 3-4).
Figure 3-6 represents a horizontal plane, perpendicular to the
L* axis, through a CIE L*a*b* color space. The dot above the
letter A is the color of a red apple, which is expressed by L* = 42.8,
a* = 47.1, and b* = 13.9. In comparison, the dot next to the letter
B is for a dental body (gingival) porcelain of shade A2 with a higher
(lighter) L* of 73.0, a lower a* of 1.0, and a higher b* of 14.4.
In the CIE L*a*b* color space, the difference between two colors (ΔE* or ΔE*ab) would be the distance between the two points
representing the two colors and can be determined by the following formula:
1

E *ab  [( L*)2  ( a*)2  ( b*)2 ] 2 .

(1)
The color difference formula is designed to provide a quantitative
representation of the color difference between a pair of colored
specimens under a given set of experimental conditions. The value,
however, is of little clinical significance without an understanding
of the magnitude of color difference considered perceptible or
acceptable by observers. The smallest perceptible color difference
or perceptibility threshold (PT) refers to the smallest color difference
that can be detected by 50% of observers under standardized
conditions. The range of PT values reported in the literature is
0.4 to 4.0, with ΔE* = 1.0 being the value reported most often.
Similarly, the difference in color that is esthetically acceptable by
50% of observers is known as the acceptability threshold (AT). The
range of AT values reported in the literature is 2.0 to 6.8, with a
range of 3.3 to 3.7 being the value reported most often. International
Standards Organization (ISO) 28642:2016 uses a PT of ΔE* = 1.2

CHAPTER 3

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

55

• Figure 3-6 Hunter L*a*b* color chart. The dot above the letter A is
the color of a red apple, which is expressed by L* = 42.8, a* = 47.1, and
b* = 13.9. (Courtesy Minolta Corporation, Instrument Systems Division,
Ramsey, NJ.)

• Figure 3-7 Tab arrangements of the Vitapan classical shade guide:
classical group division according to hue (top row), arrangement according to value scale with no group division from lightest to darkest (middle
row), and alternative arrangement according to color difference (ΔE*) in
relation to the lightest tab (bottom row). (From Paravina RD, Powers JM:
Esthetic color training in dentistry, St. Louis, 2004, Mosby.)

and an AT of ΔE* = 2.7, established in a prospective multicenter
research project.

Color Matching
In dental practice, color matching is most often performed with
the use of a shade guide, such as the one shown in Figure 3-7, to
select the color of ceramic veneers, inlays, or crowns. Shade-guide
tabs are used in much the same way as paint chips to match the
color of house paint. The individual shade tabs shown in the top
row of Figure 3-7 are grouped according to hue (A, B, C, and D,
where A = red-brown, B = red-yellow, C = gray, D = red-gray),
followed by value (1 to 4, or lightest to darkest). This arrangement follows the “classical” order originated by Vita for porcelain. Recently, however, the trend is to arrange shade guides in
decreasing order of value (lightest to darkest: B1, A1, B2, D2,
A2, C1, C2, D4, A3, D3, B3, A3.5, B4, C3, A4, C4), as shown
in the middle row of Figure 3-7. Matching of tooth shades is
simplified by the arrangement of tabs by value; this arrange-

• Figure 3-8 Vita shade guide used to match the restorative shade to the
adjacent teeth. (Courtesy Dr. Monica Fernandez.)

ment has been found to be easier and more reliable to use. The
bottom row of Figure 3-7 shows the arrangement according to
the color difference as calculated by equation (1), with respect
to the lightest tab. Although a reasonable match can be achieved
clinically between a tooth (or restoration) and one of the shadeguide tabs, relaying the information to a lab or technician can
prove to be a challenge. To ensure esthetic results, additional
information, such as drawings, descriptions, and photographs
(Figure 3-8), should also be sent. Obviously, if the technician
can see the actual teeth, the probability of achieving an acceptable color match will be even greater.
Further, the subjective preference of the patient must be
considered. An exact match between a crown or bridge and the
remaining sound teeth is not always sufficient. Patients usually
prefer a lighter shade (higher value) in a restoration compared
with the color of the natural teeth. Figure 3-9, A, shows the
result of shade matching in which the two central incisor
crowns were selected to be somewhat higher in value than the
lateral incisors. Even though there is a slight mismatch, the
color difference is perceptible only under close observation
(Figure 3-9, B), and the patient was quite satisfied with the
overall effect.

The Effect of the Observer
Signals of color are sent to the human brain from three sets of
receptors in the retina called cones, which are especially sensitive to
red, blue, and green. Factors that interfere with the true perception
of color generally include low or high light levels, fatigue of the color
receptors, sex, age, memory, and cultural background. However,
according to a 1995 study by Anusavice and Barrett, there appears
to be no effect related to observer age, gender, or clinical experience
relative to the accuracy of dental shade matching.
At low light levels, the rods in the retina of the human eye
are more dominant than the cones, and color perception is lost.
As the brightness becomes more intense, color appears to change
(Bezold–Brucke effect). Also, if an observer looks at a red object
for a reasonably long time, receptor fatigue causes a green hue to
be seen when he or she then looks at a white background. For
this reason, if a patient is observed against an intense-colored
background, the clinician may select a tooth shade with a hue
that is shifted somewhat toward the complementary color of the
background color. For example, a blue background shifts the
color selection toward yellow, and an orange background shifts

56

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

A

B
• Figure 3-9 Two central incisor metal-ceramic crowns with porcelain margins. A, The value (L*) of these
crowns is higher than that of the adjacent lateral incisor teeth. B, Close-up view of the crowns on the left.

the color selection toward blue-green. Unfortunately, 8% of the
male and 0.5% of the female population exhibit color blindness.
Most commonly, these people cannot distinguish red from green
because of the lack of either green-sensitive or red-sensitive cones.
However, this deficiency may not affect the shade selection of
natural teeth.
The ranges of hue, chroma, and value ordinarily found in
human teeth represent only a small portion of the standard color
space. For example, compare Figure 3-4 within the subset of the
color space shown in Figure 3-6. The selectivity of the human eye
is such that accurate color matching is difficult even when one is
using a shade guide that contains only a small number of shades
(Figure 3-7). Recent developments in the use of digital technology
for color matching are discussed in Chapter 15, Color Matching.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are some objects color matched under one type of illumination but
mismatched under another illumination source?

The Effect of the Light Source
Because the spectral distribution of the light reflected from or transmitted through an object is dependent on the spectral content of the
incident light, the appearance of an object is dependent on the nature
of the light in which the object is viewed. Daylight, incandescent,
and fluorescent lamps are common sources of light in the dental
operatory or laboratory, and each of these has a different spectral
distribution. Objects that appear to be color matched under one type
of light may appear different under another type. This phenomenon
is called metamerism. Thus, if possible, color matching should be
done under two or more different light sources, one of which should
be daylight, and the laboratory shade-matching procedures should
be performed under the same lighting conditions.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why do some tooth-colored restorations appear to be missing when viewed
under “blacklight” illumination, such as that used in nightclubs and at rock
concerts?

Fluorescence
In addition to the processes already discussed, natural tooth
structure absorbs light at wavelengths too short to be visible to
the human eye. These wavelengths between 300 and 400 nm

are referred to as near-ultraviolet radiation. Natural sunlight,
photoflash lamps, certain types of vapor lamps, and ultraviolet
lights used in decorative lighting (“blacklights”) are sources
containing substantial amounts of near-ultraviolet radiation.
The energy that the tooth absorbs is converted into light with
longer wavelengths, in which case the tooth actually becomes a
light source. This phenomenon is called fluorescence. The emitted
light, a blue-white color, is primarily in the 400- to 450-nm range.
Fluorescence makes a definite contribution to the brightness and
vital appearance of a human tooth. As an example, ceramic crowns
or composite restorations that lack a fluorescing agent appear as
missing teeth when viewed under a black light.

Radiopacity
X-rays, a form of electromagnetic radiation, lie at the high-energy
end of the spectrum. Hence the interaction of dental biomaterials
with x-radiation may be classified as an optical property. There
are numerous circumstances where the ability to distinguish a
dental material radiographically from the surrounding tissue is
necessary. For example, sufficient radiographic contrast is required
in an x-ray image to assess restorations for marginal defects or
breakdown, help differentiate composite restorations from dental
caries, and detect microleakage. In case of accidental ingestion
or traumatic impaction of dentures or other appliances, a delay
in the detection, location, and removal of the appliance and
appliance fragments may be life threatening. A significant number
of foreign bodies of dental origin, with many injuries and deaths,
are reported each year, particularly among the elderly.
The amount of x-ray energy absorbed by an object depends
on the density and thickness of the material and the energy of
the radiation. Generally, the higher the atomic number of the
component atoms, the greater the x-ray absorbance and the larger the
contrast produced. Polymers and resins are inherently radiolucent,
whereas metals with atomic numbers above about 19 (potassium)
are inherently radiopaque. To impart radiopacity, restorative resins
often use strontium- or barium-containing glass reinforcing particles
(see Chapter 5, Imparting Radiopacity); denture polymers may
(but rarely) contain barium-sulfate or other heavy-metal compound
additives to render them radiopaque. Radiopacity similar to that
of hard tissue provides the optimal contrast for dental restorations.
When radiopacity is too low, the resin will not be visible on an
x-ray image; when radiopacity is too high, this may block out and
obscure details of the adjacent anatomy. Dentin has approximately
the same radiodensity as that of aluminum, whereas enamel has

CHAPTER 3

approximately twice the radiodensity of dentin and aluminum.
To claim that a composite is radiopaque, the American Dental
Association requires commercial dental restorative resins to have a
radiopacity at least equal to that of aluminum. To be adequately
detectable on medical chest x-ray images, a denture resin fragment
of 2 mm should have a radiopacity equal to or greater than that of
0.2 mm of copper. This requires the resin to have sufficient additive
to produce a radiopacity about three times that of aluminum.

Thermal Properties
When restorative materials are placed in deep cavities, the heat
transmitted to vital dental pulp must be limited so as to prevent
thermal shock and trauma. In other circumstances, as with denture
bases in contact with mucosal surfaces, the transmission of a certain
amount of thermal energy is desirable to convey the sensations of
heat and cold associated with food and beverages. Such attributes
are governed by the properties of thermal conductivity and thermal
diffusivity. Another category of thermal behavior is the expansion
when heated and contraction when cooled. If, for example, a dental
restoration expands and contracts at a rate different from that of the
adjacent hard tissues, marginal failures and leakage can result. This
attribute is governed by the coefficient of thermal expansion.

Thermal Conductivity
Thermal conductivity (κ) is the physical property that governs
heat transfer through a material by conductive flow. The conduction of heat within a solid involves the transfer of thermal energy
from one end of a material to another across a temperature gradient. Thermal conductivity is defined as the quantity of heat in calories per second passing through a material l cm thick with a cross
section of 1 cm2 having a temperature difference of 1 kelvin (K)
(=1 °C) and is measured under steady-state conditions in which
the temperature gradient does not change. The International System (SI) unit or measure for thermal conductivity is watts per
meter per kelvin (W ⋅ m−1 ⋅ K−1). In general, thermal conductivities increase in the following order, although there are exceptions:
polymers < ceramics < metals.
Materials that have a high thermal conductivity are called conductors, whereas materials of low thermal conductivity are called
insulators. The higher is a substance’s thermal conductivity, the
greater is the ability to transmit thermal energy, and vice versa. If
the thermal gradient does not change (i.e., heat is supplied at one
end and withdrawn at the other end at a steady rate), the thermal
conductivity is a measure of the heat transferred.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the difference between thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity,
and why does it matter in dentistry?

Thermal Diffusivity
Thermal diffusivity (h) is a measure of the speed with which a
temperature change will spread through an object when one surface is heated. Thermal diffusivity is calculated from the thermal
conductivity divided by the product of density and heat capacity:

h


,
cp 
(2)

TABLE 3-1

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

57

Density and Thermal Properties of Water,
Enamel, Dentin, and Dental Materials

Material

Density
(g cm−3)

Specific
Heat
(cal g−1 K−1)

Thermal
Conductivity
(W m−1 K−1)

Thermal
Diffusivity
(cm2 s−1)

Water

1.00

1.00

0.44

0.0014

Dentin

2.14

0.30

0.57

0.0018–0.0026

Glass
ionomer

2.13

0.27

0.51–0.72

0.0022

Zinc
phosphate

2.59

0.12

1.05

0.0030

Composite

1.6–2.4

0.20

1.09–1.37

0.0019–0.0073

Enamel

2.97

0.18

0.93

0.0047

Amalgam

11.6

0.005

22.6

0.96

Pure gold

19.3

0.03

297

1.18

where h is thermal diffusivity, κ is thermal conductivity, cp is heat
capacity at constant pressure, and ρ is the temperature-dependent
density in grams per cm3 (cp is numerically equal to the more
commonly used term specific heat, which is the quantity of heat
needed to raise the temperature of a unit mass by 1 K).
A material with a high density and high specific heat will likely
have a low thermal diffusivity. Such a material changes temperature
very slowly. Low heat capacity and high thermal conductivity lead
to high diffusivity, and temperature changes transmit rapidly
through the material. As shown in Table 3-1, gold has about onetenth the heat capacity of dentin, about 500 times the thermal
conductivity, and about 600 times the thermal diffusivity. Thus
a pure gold filling would provide the tooth pulp with very little
protection against thermal shock compared with natural dentin.
The thermal conductivities and thermal diffusivities of cementing
materials (glass ionomer, zinc phosphate, and composite) compare
favorably with enamel and dentin, in contrast with the markedly
higher values for metallic restorative materials. Thus, when the
remaining dentin between the cavity and the pulp is too thin to
provide sufficient thermal protection, an additional layer of an
insulating base material, such as the dental cements discussed in
Chapter 7, Pulp Protection, should be placed.
During ingestion of hot foods and liquids, the thermal
diffusivity reflects the thermal energy retained by the dental
restorative material, whereas the thermal conductivity dictates
how much thermal energy passes through this material. Because
the rapid temperature changes last a short duration, the thermal
energy passed could be negligible, whereas the energy retained by
the material keeps the material at a higher temperature after the
hot food has passed. Therefore thermal diffusivity plays a more
important role than thermal conductivity clinically.

Coefficient of Thermal Expansion
When materials undergo a temperature increase, the vibrational
motion of atoms and mean interatomic (bond) distances increase.
This results in an increase in volume or an expansion of the material. The increase is described by the coefficient of thermal expansion, α, which is defined as the change in length per unit of the
original length of a material when the temperature of this material

58

PA RT I

TABLE 3-2

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Coefficients of Thermal Expansion (α)
of Dental Materials Compared With
Those of Tooth Enamel and Dentin

restorations. Consider a porcelain veneer that is fired to a metal
substrate (coping). The veneer may contract to a greater extent than
the metal during cooling and induce tangential tensile stresses or tensile
hoop (circumferential) tensile stresses in the porcelain, which may cause
immediate or delayed crack formation. Although these thermal stresses
cannot be eliminated completely, they can be reduced appreciably by
the selection of materials whose expansion or contraction coefficients
are matched fairly closely (within 4%). This is discussed more fully in
Chapter 10, Bonding Porcelain to Metal, on ceramics.

α (ppm K−1)

α material/α tooth
enamel

Aluminous porcelain

6.6

0.58

Dentin

8.3

0.75

Commercially pure titanium

8.5

0.77

Type II glass ionomer

11.0

0.96

Tooth enamel

11.4

1.00

Gold-palladium alloy

13.5

1.18

Gold (pure)

14.0

1.23

Electrochemical Properties

Palladium-silver alloy

14.8

1.30

Amalgam

25.0

2.19

Dental composite

14–50

1.2–4.4

Denture resin

81.0

7.11

Pit and fissure sealant

85.0

7.46

Inlay wax

400.0

35.1

Metals undergo chemical reactions with nonmetallic elements in the
environment to produce chemical compounds. This process is known
as corrosion, which in most cases causes deterioration of the metal surface. Dentistry uses a wide variety of metals for restorations and prosthetic devices; successful clinical performance and long-term durability
require adequate corrosion resistance of these materials in the oral environment. Many of the most commonly used metals derive little or
no protection from the corrosion products that form under normal
circumstances, which is unfortunate. The rusting of iron is a familiar
example of the effects that may be produced by such a process. Gold
and platinum group metals, which include ruthenium, rhodium, palladium, osmium, iridium, and platinum, resist chemical attack of this
nature very well and are therefore called noble metals. Gold, palladium,
and platinum are commonly used as dental alloys.
The oral environment is highly conducive to electrochemical
action. This environment is warm, moist, and subjected to wide
fluctuations in temperature and pH. Thus an understanding
of corrosion and the underlying electrochemical properties is
essential to control electrochemical effects and thereby minimize
corrosion and corrosion-induced problems in dentistry.

Material

is raised 1 K (see the discussion of thermal energy in Chapter 2,
Influence of Interatomic Bond):


L
,
L  T
(3)

where L is the original length, ΔL is the change in length, and
ΔT is the temperature change. Values for α of some materials
of interest in dentistry are presented in Table 3-2. The units are
typically expressed as either mm/m/K or ppm/K.
This parameter is extremely important in dental applications as
broad ranging as producing cast restorations that fit and maintaining
the seal of a restoration margin. The influence of this property often
dictates the procedures that have been developed for using wax patterns, casting metal crowns, placing amalgam and composite resin
restorations, and preparing metal-ceramic crowns and bridges. A
tooth restoration may expand or contract more than the tooth during
a change in temperature; thus there may be marginal microleakage
adjacent to the restoration, or the restoration may debond from the
tooth. According to the values in Table 3-2, direct restorative materials
may experience changes in dimension of up to 4.4 times those of
tooth enamel for every degree of temperature change.
The high thermal expansion coefficient of inlay wax is also important because wax is highly susceptible to temperature changes. For
example, an accurate wax pattern that fits a prepared tooth contracts
significantly when the wax pattern is removed from the tooth or a
die in a warmer area, and then stored in a cooler area. This dimensional change is transferred to a cast metal restoration that is made
by the lost wax process. Similarly, denture teeth that have been set
in denture base wax in a relatively warm laboratory may shift appreciably in their simulated intraoral positions after the denture base is
moved to a cooler room before processing of the denture.
Thermal stresses produced from thermal expansion or contraction
differences are also important in the production of metal-ceramic

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which factors in the oral environment promote the corrosion of metallic
dental restorations and prostheses?

Tarnish and Corrosion
A differentiation should be made between tarnish and corrosion.
Even though there is a definite technical difference, clinically
distinguishing between the two phenomena is difficult, and the
terms are often used interchangeably in the dental literature.
Tarnish is a surface discoloration on a metal or a slight loss or
alteration of the surface finish or luster. In the oral environment,
tarnish often occurs from the formation of deposits or thin films,
such as oxides, sulfides, or chlorides, on the surface of a restoration. Tarnish is often an early indication and precursor of
corrosion. For example, eggs and certain other foods contain significant amounts of sulfur. Various sulfides, such as hydrogen or
ammonium sulfide, initiate tarnish and eventually corrode silver,
copper, tin, mercury, and other metals present in their alloys.
Corrosion is a process whereby deterioration of a metal is caused
by a reaction with the environment. In due course, corrosion can
cause severe and catastrophic disintegration of metals. Even if highly
localized, corrosion may cause mechanical failure of a structure, the
actual volume of material lost is quite small. Corrosive disintegration
can take place through exposure to atmosphere or immersion in
acid, alkaline, or certain chemical solutions. Keep in mind that
saliva is an electrolyte, which is conducive to the corrosion of
metallic restorations.

CHAPTER 3

Ammeter

Classifications of Corrosion
There are two general classifications of corrosion reactions: chemical
corrosion and electrochemical corrosion. In chemical corrosion, there
is a direct combination of metallic and nonmetallic elements.
Corrosion occurs because the most commonly used metals and
alloys are not in their lowest-energy state (thermodynamically the
most stable state). For example, iron (Fe) is extracted from various
iron oxides. Similarly, aluminum is extracted from aluminum
oxide (Al2O3), and copper from copper sulfide (CuS). Oxidized
compounds such as Fe3O4, Al2O3, and CuS are thermodynamically
stable and consequently occur in nature in these fully reacted
forms. Thus pure metals spontaneously convert from a highly
reactive state to their lowest-energy oxidized state by reacting
with oxygen, sulfur, or chlorine. Another good example is the
discoloration of silver by sulfur. Such a reaction is also referred to
as “dry” corrosion because this reaction occurs in the absence of
water or other fluid electrolytes. Notice that metals lose electrons
in the corrosion process. Ceramics do not corrode by the loss of
electrons because they are already fully oxidized and are in their
lowest-energy states. However, the glass phase of ceramics can
dissolve in acidic and basic media. Noble metals are unique; they
do not form stable oxides at room temperature.
Electrochemical corrosion, also known as galvanic corrosion,
requires the presence of water or some other fluid electrolyte and
a pathway for the transport of electrons (i.e., an electrical current).
This type of corrosion is also referred to as wet corrosion because a
fluid electrolyte is required. Electrochemical corrosion is seldom
isolated and almost invariably accompanied by chemical corrosion. However, the electrochemical mode of corrosion is more
important for dental materials and is the focus in this chapter.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which mechanisms of electrochemical corrosion are possible for metallic
dental restorations and prostheses?

Electrochemical Mechanism of Corrosion
When a metal is immersed in a fluid electrolyte, the chemical
potential causes enough ions to dissolve to form a saturated solution and produce an equal number of free electrons. The loss of
electrons by a metal is known as oxidation and is the initial electrochemical event in the corrosion process. The ease with which a
metal gives up electrons in solution and oxidizes can be expressed
in terms of the oxidation potential. When a second metal of different composition is placed in the same solution, the second metal
will then compete with the first metal to dissolve in the solution.
If the two metals are connected with an external circuit, they form
an electrochemical cell, as illustrated schematically in Figure 3-10.
The metal having a greater oxidation potential than the other
metal will be the one that releases positive ions (M+) with the production of free electrons, as illustrated by the following anodic/
oxidation reaction:
M0 → M + + e − .
(4)
This metal is also called an anode, indicating the metal surface is
undergoing an oxidation reaction and is corroding. Once the solution
is saturated with metal ions from anode, reduction reactions occur
at the other metal surface, which is called a cathode, where the free

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

59

External
connector

Amalgam
anode

Gold alloy
cathode

Saliva
Electrolyte

• Figure 3-10 Diagram of an electrochemical cell consisting of a simulated amalgam anode, a gold alloy cathode, and saliva as the electrolyte.

electrons produced from the anode are consumed and metal ions from
the saturated solution are deposited. For example, metal ions may
be removed from the solution to form metal atoms (reaction 4), as
occurs in metal plating; hydrogen ions may be converted to hydrogen
gas (reaction 5); or hydroxyl ions may be formed (reaction 6):
M + + e − → M0 ,
(5)
2H+ + 2e − → H2 ↑,
(6)
2H2 O  O2  4e   4(OH) .

(7)
In summary, an electrochemical cell is composed of four essential components: an anode, a cathode, an external circuit, and an
electrolyte. Both the anode and cathode are called electrodes. The
electrolyte supplies the ions needed at the cathode by dissolving
metal ions at the anode. The external circuit serves as a conduction path to carry electrons from the anode to the cathode because
there is a difference in electrical potential that can be measured,
which is known as voltage (V). This simple electrolytic cell is, in
principle, a battery because the flow of electrons in the external
circuit is capable of lighting a light bulb in a flashlight or producing a physiological sensation (i.e., pain).
In order for electrochemical corrosion to be an ongoing process, the production of electrons by the oxidation reactions at the
anode must be exactly balanced by the consumption of electrons
in the reduction reactions at the cathode. Often the cathodic reactions are considered to be the primary driving force for electrochemical corrosion. We will find in later discussions that keeping
a reaction from happening at the cathode is recommended to
reduce or eliminate corrosion.
Different metals have different tendencies for oxidation because
of their differences in electronic structure; this tendency to oxidize
(ionize) is measured by the electrode potential, expressed in volts or
millivolts. To measure the electrode potential of any material is to
determine the voltage difference between the metal and a standard
hydrogen electrode in water at 25 °C. The potential of hydrogen
electrode is arbitrarily designated as zero potential; therefore the

60

PA RT I

TABLE 3-3

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Electromotive Series of the Metals

Metal

Ion

Electrode Potential (V)

Gold

Au+

+1.50

Gold

Au3+

+1.36

Platinum

Pt2+

+0.86

Palladium

2+

+0.82

Hg

2+

+0.80

+

+0.80

Copper

Cu

+

+0.47

Bismuth

Bi3+

+0.23

Antimony

Sb3+

+0.10

Hydrogen

H+

−0.00

Lead

Pb2+

−0.12

2+

−0.14

Nickel

2+

Ni

−0.23

Cadmium

Cd2+

−0.40

Iron

Fe2+

−0.44

Chromium

Cr2+

−0.56

Zinc

Zn2+

−0.76

Aluminum

Al3+

−1.70

+

−2.71

2+

−2.87

Mercury
Silver

Tin

Sodium
Calcium
Potassium

Pd

Ag

Sn

Na
Ca
K

+

−2.92

voltage difference measured is the electrode potential of the metal
being measured. Similar measurements for the elements that are
useful to the dentist yields the values that are arranged by their
equilibrium values of electrode potential in Table 3-3, which is
known as the electromotive (or galvanic) series. The sign of the
electrode potential in Table 3-3 indicates the polarity in such a
cell. Elements with a higher positive value have a lower tendency
to dissolve and are therefore more resistant to becoming oxidized
and corroded in aqueous environments. The more negative the
electrode potential, the easier it is for any particular metal to ionize
and oxidize and the more susceptible it is to tarnish and corrosion.
If two pure metals are immersed in an electrolyte and connected by an electrical conductor to form a galvanic cell, the metal
with the more negative electrode potential in Table 3-3 becomes
the anode and undergoes oxidation; that is, the ions of this metal
go into solution. As an example, in a galvanic cell composed of
copper (−0.46 V) and zinc (−0.76 V) electrodes in an aqueous
acidic solution, the zinc electrode becomes the anode and undergoes surface dissolution.
In general, the relative position of any element in the electromotive series depends not only on this element’s inherent dissolution
tendencies but also on the ionic concentration in the electrolyte. As
the ionic concentration increases, the tendency for that element to dissolve decreases. Thus an increase in metal ion content may eventually
prevent further corrosion because the metal’s ions have saturated the

immediate environment. However, this would be unusual for metallic
dental materials because dissolved ions are continually removed by
food, fluids, and tooth brushing. Thus corrosion in the mouth is
typically an ongoing process. Many types of electrochemical corrosion
are possible in the oral environment because saliva, with the salts it
contains, is a weak electrolyte. The electrochemical properties of saliva
depend on the concentrations of components, pH, surface tension, and
buffering capacity. Each of these factors may influence the strength of
any electrolyte. Thus the magnitude of the resulting corrosion process
will be controlled by these variables.
In an environment in which a metal is corroding, both anodic
and cathodic reactions take place simultaneously on the surface
of the metal. Metal ions go into solution because of the anodic
reactions, and other ions are reduced in the cathodic reactions.
These two reactions may occur at randomly distributed sites on
the metal surface, or more frequently, there are anodic areas at
which mostly the metal dissolves and cathodic areas at which
mostly other ions are discharged. Several forms of electrochemical
corrosion discussed next are based on the mechanisms that produce these inhomogeneous areas.

Dissimilar Metals
An important type of electrochemical reaction occurs when
combinations of dissimilar metals are in direct physical contact.
Here, the dental reference is two adjacent metal restorations where
the metal surfaces are chemically dissimilar. The alloy combinations
that may produce galvanic corrosion or electrogalvanism through
the flow of galvanic currents may be in either continuous or
intermittent contact. An example would be a dental amalgam
restoration placed on the occlusal surface of a tooth directly
opposing a gold inlay. Because both restorations are wet with saliva,
an electrical circuit exists with a difference in potential between the
dissimilar restorations (Figure 3-11). When the two restorations
are brought into contact, there is a sudden short-circuit through
the two alloys. This can result in a sharp pain, called galvanic
shock, which is well known in dentistry. An undetected piece of
aluminum foil in a baked potato can produce the same effect with
a metallic restoration during chewing.

Tissue
fluid

Saliva

Tissue
fluid

• Figure 3-11 Possible path of a galvanic current in the mouth.

CHAPTER 3

E

• Figure 3-12 Schematic illustration of a single metallic restoration showing two possible current pathways between an external surface exposed
to saliva and an interior surface exposed to dentinal fluid. Because the
dentinal fluid contains a higher Cl− concentration than saliva, it is assumed
that the electrode potential of the interior surface exposed to dentinal fluid
is more active; it is therefore given a negative sign (−). The potential difference between the two surfaces is represented by E.

A current is present even in a single isolated metallic restoration,
although this is less intense. In this situation, the electrochemical
cell is generated as a result of the electrical potential differences
created by the two electrolytes: saliva and tissue fluids. The term
tissue fluid is used to denote the dentinal fluid, soft tissue fluid,
and blood that provide the means for completing the external
circuit. Because the chloride ion concentration of dentinal fluid is
seven times higher than that of saliva, there is an assumption that
the interior surfaces of a dental restoration exposed to dentinal
fluid will have a more active electrochemical potential. Possible
current pathways are diagrammed in Figure 3-12.

Heterogeneous Surface Composition
Another type of galvanic corrosion is associated with the heterogeneous composition of the surfaces of dental alloys, whose
microstructures have been described in Chapter 2, Liquid-to-Solid
Transformation of Cast Metals. Commercial dental alloys generally contain more than three elements, and they can have complex
microstructures that result in even more heterogeneous surface
compositions. For example, when an alloy containing a two-phase
eutectic microstructural constituent is immersed in an electrolyte,
the lamellae of the phase (Figure 2-18) with the more negative electrode potential are attacked, and corrosion results.
In an alloy that is a single-phase solid solution, any cored
structure is less resistant to corrosion than is the homogenized
solid solution because of differences in electrode potential caused
by microsegregation and variations in composition between
individual microstructural elements (Chapter 2, Coring and
Homogenization Heat Treatment). Even a homogenized solid
solution is susceptible to corrosion at the grain boundaries,
which are anodic to the cathodic grain interiors, because atomic
arrangements at the grain boundaries are less regular and have
higher energies (Chapter 2, Liquid-to-Solid Transformation of
Cast Metals). Solder joints between dental alloys also corrode

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

61

because of differences in the compositions of the alloy and solder
(Chapter 9, Joining of Dental Alloys).
Impurities in alloys enhance corrosion, and these impurities
are typically segregated at the grain boundaries, as described in
Chapter 2, Liquid-to-Solid Transformation of Cast Metals. Mercury
impurities that can inadvertently contaminate gold alloys during
handling by dental personnel have electrode potentials different
from those of the bulk grains of the gold alloys. Finally, it follows
from the preceding discussion that nominally pure metals, which
do not contain significant quantities of impurities or secondary
microstructural phases acting as miniature electrodes with different
potentials, corrode at much slower rates than alloys do.

Stress Corrosion
Because the imposition of stress increases the internal energy of an
alloy, either through the elastic displacements of atoms or the creation of microstrain fields associated with dislocations (when
permanent deformation occurs, as described in Chapter 9,
Dislocation Movement in Polycrystalline Alloys), the tendency to
undergo corrosion will be increased. For most metallic dental
appliances, the deleterious effects of stress and corrosion, called
stress corrosion, are most likely to occur during fatigue or cyclic
loading in the oral environment. Thus any adjustment of the alloy
by bending, burnishing, or malleting causes localized permanent
deformation in some parts of the appliance. This adjustment results
in the creation of electrochemical cells, which consist of the more
deformed metal regions (anodic), saliva, and the not so deformed
or less deformed metal regions (cathodic), wherein the deformed
regions will undergo corrosion attack. This is one reason excessive
burnishing of the margins of metallic restorations is contraindicated.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can a small pit in the surface of a metallic restoration or a gap
between a metal restoration and a tooth become susceptible to and sustain
aggressive, localized corrosive attack?

Concentration Cell Corrosion

An important type of electrochemical corrosion is called concentration cell corrosion, which occurs whenever there are variations
in the electrolytes or in the composition of the given electrolyte
within the system. When surface irregularities, such as pits,
scratches, and cracks, in restoration surfaces are covered with saliva,
the saliva around the rim of the irregularities being exposed to the
atmosphere will be richer in oxygen concentration relative to the
saliva at the bottom of the irregularities. Recall reaction 7 that
occurs at the cathode of an electrochemical cell where the areas
around the rim are likely to become the cathode and begin to draw
electrons from oxygen-poor regions, such as the bottom of the
irregularities, to complete the reaction (Figure 3-13). Consequently,
metal atoms at the base of the pit ionize (i.e., reaction 4) and go
into solution to generate the electrons needed, causing the pit to
deepen. Thus to protect against such pitting corrosion, all metallic
dental restorative materials should be polished. A closely related
category of concentration cell corrosion is “crevice corrosion,” in
which preferential attack occurs at the crevices and marginal gaps of
crowns, bridges, and cavity restorations because of the presence of
food debris and other deposits.
There are often accumulations of food debris in the interproximal
areas of the mouth, particularly if oral hygiene is poor. This debris
then produces one type of electrolyte in that area, and the normal
saliva provides another electrolyte at the occlusal surface. Therefore

62

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

2H2O + O2 + 4e-

4(OH)-

Electrolyte

e-

e-

• Figure 3-13 A pit on a dental alloy as a corrosion cell. The region at the
bottom of the pit is an anode, and the surface around the rim of the pit is
the cathode. The metallic ions flow from the bottom to the rim through the
electrolyte, and the electrons flow through the metal to the rim.

electrolytic corrosion occurs with preferential attack of the metal
surface occurring underneath the layer of food debris. There is also the
possibility that the region covered by the debris or plaque is oxygenpoor and becomes anodic relative to the rest of the restoration.
Seldom are any one of the preceding types of electrochemical
corrosion found alone. Generally, two or more types act simultaneously, thereby compounding the problem. This phenomenon can
be illustrated by considering the dissimilar metal corrosion between
a cast gold inlay and an amalgam restoration. Because surface
deposits can form during this type of electrochemical corrosion,
differences in oxygen concentration will arise. Moreover, if the corrosion product layer is incomplete or porous, as is usually the case
with metallic dental restorations, the resulting inhomogeneous surface will produce new electrochemical cells for continued corrosion.
Obviously, good oral hygiene helps to prevent the accumulation of
surface deposits and is thus essential for minimizing corrosion.

Protection Against Corrosion
Gold coating is employed to enhance the appearance of many
commercial nondental products. However, when the gold coating
becomes scratched or pitted to a depth where the substrate metal
is exposed, the metal corrodes at a very rapid rate because of concentration cells and dissimilar metals in contact. Attempts to use
metallic and nonmetallic coatings to provide corrosion protection
for dental alloys have generally been ineffective because such coatings were too thin, incomplete, not adherent to the underlying
metal, readily scratched, or attacked by oral fluids.
However, when two dissimilar metals are in contact, paint or
another nonconductive film can be used to minimize corrosion if
this is applied to the more noble metal between the two involved.
Should a scratch occur on the protective film, the exposed cathode
area is very small and can be filled quickly by the corrosion product
from the anode, which effectively isolates the cathode.
A highly effective protection uses certain metals that develop a thin,
adherent, highly protective film by reaction with the environment;
such a metal is said to be passive. The most common example is
stainless steel, which contains sufficient amounts of chromium added
to passivate the alloy with chromium oxides. The same principle
is used in dental alloys not based on noble metals, as described in
Chapter 9, Classification of Dental Casting Alloys. Tensile stress
and certain ions, such as chlorine ions, can disrupt the protective
oxide film, leading to rapid corrosion. Therefore patients should be
warned against using household bleaches for cleaning partial denture
frameworks or removable orthodontic appliances that are alloyed

with chromium. Titanium (Ti) also forms a passivating titanium
oxide film, which is of interest because both commercially pure Ti
and alloys in which Ti is a major component are used for a variety
of dental applications, such as cast restorations, orthodontic wires,
endodontic instruments, and implants discussed in Chapters 9 and
12. Titanium and Ti alloys are widely used in dentistry because of
their favorable combination of chemical, physical, and biological
properties and their resistance to corrosion. Their consequent
biocompatibility is among their major advantages. Nevertheless,
corrosion can occur, and the long-term accumulation of corrosion
products can lead to fractures of the alloy–implant interface, implant
abutment, or implant body. The combination of stress, corrosion, and
bacteria contributes to implant failure.
Noble metals resist corrosion because their electromotive force
is positive with regard to any of the common reduction reactions
found in the oral environment. To corrode a noble metal under
such conditions, an external current (overpotential) is required. A
guideline that has been employed by the manufacturers of many
dental alloys is that at least half the atoms should be noble metals
(gold, platinum, and palladium) to ensure against corrosion. Palladium has been found to be effective in reducing the susceptibility to sulfide tarnishing for alloys containing silver. If noble metals
are used to avoid corrosion, it is important that the more active
constituents of the alloy be uniformly dispersed in a random solid
solution because the formation of a second phase that is enriched
in an active metal will produce a galvanic corrosion cell.

Clinical Significance of Galvanic Currents
Small galvanic currents associated with electrogalvanism are known
to be continually present in the mouth, promoting corrosion, as discussed earlier. As long as metallic restorative materials are employed,
the elimination of these galvanic currents is unlikely. Although postoperative pain caused by galvanic shock is not common, this can be
a source of discomfort to an occasional patient. However, such postoperative pain usually occurs immediately after the insertion of a
new restoration and generally subsides and disappears in a few days.
The primary factor responsible for the pain resulting from this current flow is likely the physiological condition of the tooth. Once the
tooth has recovered from the injury of preparing the cavity and has
returned to a more normal physiological condition, the current flow
produces no response. The most practical method for reducing or
eliminating galvanic shock is a varnish coating on the surface of the
metallic restoration. As long as the varnish remains, the restoration
is insulated from saliva, and no electrochemical cell is established.
By the time the varnish has worn away, the pulp has usually healed
sufficiently such that no pain persists.
The balance of evidence shows that galvanic currents are
deleterious only from the standpoint of patient discomfort—and
even then, only rarely. Nevertheless, dentists should avoid clinical
procedures that exacerbate the condition, such as insertion of
an amalgam restoration directly in contact with a gold crown.
Mercury released from the corroding amalgam (the anode) may
interact with the gold alloy (the cathode) and weaken the amalgam
restoration. A discoloration of both restorations may also occur,
and often a metallic taste develops that can persist indefinitely.

Magnetic Materials
Magnetic materials are ubiquitous, being found in a wide range
of everyday items, from magnetic bulletin boards to compasses
to electrical generators. In dentistry, they are primarily used for

CHAPTER 3

retention of implant-borne prostheses and for orthodontic tooth
movement. The force that magnets deliver is biologically safe and
can be directed and exerted both within the mouth and through
soft and hard tissues.
Magnetism occurs in nature in magnetite, a magnetic iron
oxide, and in the synthetic alloys aluminium-nickel-cobalt
(AlNiCo), platinum-cobalt (PtCo), samarium-cobalt (SmCo),
and neodymium-iron-boron (NdFeB). Magnetism develops
from circulating electrical currents. In magnetic materials, the
circulation is caused by electrons orbiting within the atoms. In
most materials the magnetic effects among the electrons cancel
out, but in iron and the alloys just mentioned, a net magnetic
field is induced when the atoms are properly aligned. This alignment produces a magnetic field, which emerges from one pole
(north pole) and returns to the other (south) pole. A magnetic
field induces changes in the surrounding medium in proportion to flux density, the unit of which is the tesla (T), and the
flux density is proportional to the size of the magnet. Attraction or repulsion between two magnets is dependent on their
pole orientation and is inversely proportional to the square of
the distance between them. These properties result in a dramatic
reduction in attractive or repulsive force when magnets are not
optimally aligned and not in close proximity.
A major shortcoming of magnets is their susceptibility to
corrosion and need to be protected by a highly durable coating.
Another problem is the loss of magnetic flux over time or in the
presence of elevated temperatures. In dentistry, the magnetic materials used generate a constant field that is permanent at mouth
temperatures. However, heating to relatively modest temperatures
can cause irreversible magnetic loss. For example, this can occur
in applications where magnets are embedded in acrylic appliances
that, during curing, reach temperatures of 80 °C to 90 °C from the
exothermic setting reaction of the methyl-methacrylate resin (see
Chapter 11, Temperature Rise).
Within their range of current dental uses, magnets and static
magnetic fields have been found to be biologically safe if the
flux is less than 40 mT, according to the guidelines of the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection
and the World Health Organization. According to these organizations, vertigo and nausea are experienced when the head
moves rapidly in a field greater than 2 T, as might occur during
medical magnetic resonance imaging. These symptoms derive
from the disturbance of vestibular function by induced current in the central nervous system. There is little evidence of
other effects, including carcinogenesis, although experimental
data are still sparse. Magnetic fields developed near the gingiva by magnetic attachments for removable partial dentures
have been reported to be well below 40 mT—in the 10- to
15-mT range.

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

63

Selected Readings
Barna GJ, Taylor JW, King GE, et al: The influence of selected light
intensities on color perception within the color range of natural teeth,
J Prosthet Dent 46:450–453, 1981.
Based on a study of the influence of light intensity on the ability to
discriminate color differences within the color range of natural teeth.
A significant number of the dentists in the study were found to be
color-deficient. In such instances, the dentist should obtain assistance
when matching tooth shades.
Berzins DW, Kawashima I, Graves R, et al: Electrochemical characteristics of
high-Pd alloys in relation to Pd-allergy, Dent Mater 16:266–273, 2000.
In vitro electrochemical evaluations of a variety of palladiumcontaining alloys provide insight into the mechanism of palladium
allergy for some patients.
Calamia JR, Trushkowsky RD, Wolff MS, editors: Successful esthetic and
cosmetic dentistry for the modern dental practice update 2011, Dent
Clin N Am 55:187–418, 2011.
Presents the clinical steps needed to achieve predictable esthetic color
management.
Chaturvedi TP: An overview of the corrosion aspect of dental implants
(titanium and its alloys), Indian J Dent Res 20:91–98, 2009.
Chrcanovic B, de Souza LN: Tracheotomy for a foreign body in the larynx, Oral Maxillofac Surg 13:55–58, 2009.
Shows radiograph of a swallowed partial denture. Such inadvertently
swallowed foreign objects can be immediately life-threatening and
must be adequately radiopaque to safely determine and direct removal.
Goodacre CJ, Paravina RD, Bergen SF, et al: A contemporary guide to
color and shade selection for prosthodontists, American College of
Prosthodontists 2009. [Educational DVD.]
Megremis S, Carey CM: Corrosion and Tarnish of Dental Alloys, ASM
Handbook, Metals Park, OH, 2006, American Society for Metals Int,
pp. 891–921.
This article describes dental alloy compositions and their properties. It
discusses the safety and efficacy considerations of dental alloy devices.
The article defines and compares interstitial fluid and oral fluid environments. Also, the effects of restoration contact on electrochemical
parameters are examined, and the concentration of cells developed
by dental alloy-environment electrochemical reactions are reviewed.
Paravina Rade D: Dental Color Matcher/an online education and training program for esthetic dentistry. http://www.scadent.org/news/free
-color-training.
This online CE course presents a novel approach to practical shade
matching and advanced esthetics.
Upadhyay D, Panchal MA, Dbey RS, et al: Corrosion of alloys used in
dentistry: A review, Mater Sci Eng A 432:1–11, 2006.
Yuan JC-C, Brewer JD, Monaco EA, et al: Defining a natural tooth color
space based on a 3-dimensional shade system, J Prosthet Dent 98:110–
119, 2007.
Not all commercial shade guides cover all the areas of value, hue, and
chroma present in human tooth structure. These articles analyze and
present examples of this problem.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Physical Properties
Chrcanovic B, de Souza LN: Tracheotomy for a foreign body in the
larynx, Oral Maxillofac Surg 13:55–58, 2009.
Shows radiograph of a swallowed partial denture. Such inadvertently
swallowed foreign objects can be immediately life-threatening and
must be adequately radiopaque to safely determine and direct removal.
Haidary A, Leider JS, Silbergleit R: Unsuspected swallowing of a partial
denture, Am J Neuroradiol 28:1734–1735, 2007.
A recent case report of a swallowed partial denture lodged in the hypopharynx and upper esophagus. The subtle imaging appearance and difficulty of detection and location of the swallowed denture is discussed.
Color and Optical Effects
American Dental Association: Dental product spotlight: Dental shade
guides, J Am Dent Assoc 133:366–367, 2002.
American Dental Association: Esthetic dentistry: A new direction, J Am
Dent Assoc 115(special issue):3E–112E, 1987.
This is a series of papers covering the many facets of selecting materials
and clinical procedures used in esthetic dentistry. Depicted are the
improved services available through bonding technology, with
particular emphasis on the organization of color in the design and
fabrication of restorative materials.
Antonson SA, Anusavice KJ: Contrast ratio of veneering and core ceramics
as a function of thickness, Int J Prosthodont 14:316–320, 2001.
Barna GJ, Taylor JW, King GE, et al: The influence of selected light
intensities on color perception within the color range of natural
teeth, J Prosthet Dent 46:450–453, 1981.
Based on a study of the influence of light intensity on the ability to
discriminate color differences within the color range of natural teeth.
A significant number of the dentists in the study were found to be
color-deficient. In such instances, the dentist should obtain assistance
when matching tooth shades.
Calamia JR, Trushkowsky RD, Wolff MS, editors: Successful esthetic
and cosmetic dentistry for the modern dental practice: Update
2011, Dent Clin N Am 55:187–418, 2011.
Presents the clinical steps needed to achieve predictable esthetic color
management.
Chu S, Devigus A, Mieleszko A: The Fundamentals of Color: Shade
Matching and Communication in Esthetic Dentistry, Carol Steam, IL,
2004, Quintessence.
Cleland TM: The Munsell color system. A practical description with
suggestions for its use. http://www.applepainter.com.
An especially useful explanation of complementary colors is given in
Chapter 5.
Goodacre CJ, Paravina RD, Bergen SF, et al: A contemporary guide to
color and shade selection for prosthodontists, American College of
Prosthodontists, 2009. [Educational DVD.]

McLean JW: The science and art of ceramics. Vol. 1: The nature of dental ceramics
and their clinical use1, Amador City, CA, 1979, Quintessence.
For those interested in an in-depth discussion of principles of color as
related to dental ceramics, basic fundamentals are clearly interwoven
with clinical procedures.
Paravina Rade D: Dental Color Matcher/an online education and training program for esthetic dentistry. http://www.scadent.org/news
/free-color-training.
This online CE course presents a novel approach to practical shade
matching and advanced esthetics.
Parker RM: Shade matching for indirect restorations in the esthetic zone,
J Cosmet Dent 23:98–104, 2008.
Yuan JC-C, Brewer JD, Monaco EA, et al: Defining a natural tooth
color space based on a 3-dimensional shade system, J Prosthet
Dent 98:110–119, 2007.
Not all commercial shade guides cover all the areas of value, hue, and
chroma present in human tooth structure. These articles analyze and
present examples of this problem.
Electrochemical Properties
Berzins DW, Kawashima I, Graves R, et al: Electrochemical characteristics
of high-Pd alloys in relation to Pd-allergy, Dent Mater 16:266–273,
2000.
In vitro electrochemical evaluations of a variety of palladiumcontaining alloys provide insight into the mechanism of palladium
allergy for some patients.
Chaturvedi TP: An overview of the corrosion aspect of dental implants
(titanium and its alloys), Indian J Dent Res 20:91–98, 2009.
Marek M: Interactions between dental amalgams and the oral environment, Adv Dent Res 6:100–109, 1992.
A review of corrosion in dental amalgam and its physical, chemical,
and biological consequences.
Megremis S, Carey CM: Corrosion and Tarnish of Dental Alloys, ASM
Handbook, Metals Park, OH, 2006, American Society for Metals Int,
pp. 891–921.
This article describes dental alloy compositions and their properties. It discusses the safety and efficacy considerations of dental alloy
devices. The article defines and compares interstitial fluid and oral
fluid environments. Also, the effects of restoration contact on electrochemical parameters are examined, and the concentration of cells
developed by dental alloy-environment electrochemical reactions are
reviewed.
Upadhyay D, Panchal MA, Dbey RS, et al: Corrosion of alloys used in
dentistry: A review, Mater Sci Eng A 432:1–11, 2006.
Walker RS, Wade AG, Iazzetti G, et al: Galvanic interaction between gold
and amalgam: Effect of zinc, time and surface treatments, J Am Dent
Assoc 134:1463–1467, 2003.

63.e1

