17

Biocompatibility
OUTLINE
Basic Concept of Biocompatibility

Side Effect of Various Material Groups

Biological Effects From Exposure to Dental Materials

Patient Reports and Complaints of Adverse Effects

Occupational Hazards for Dental Personnel

Clinical Guidelines for Selecting Biocompatible Materials

Biocompatibility Testing

Acknowledgments

Legal Regulations and Risk Classes

KEY TERMS
GENERAL
Adverse reaction Any unintended, unexpected, and harmful response of an individual to a (dental) treatment or
biomaterial.
Bioactive materials Biomaterials that, in addition to their primary
function (e.g., to restore dental hard tissues), actively stimulate
a specific positive tissue response or control their microbiologic
environment.
Biocompatibility The ability of a biomaterial to perform its
desired function with respect to a medical (or dental) therapy,
without eliciting any undesirable local, allergic, or systemic effects in the recipient or beneficiary of that therapy but generating the most appropriate beneficial cellular or tissue response
in that specific situation and optimizing the clinically relevant
performance of that therapy.
Biointegration The process of forming an interface between
bone or other living tissue and an implanted material with
no intervening space. Biocompatibility is a prerequisite for
biointegration.
Osseointegration The process of forming a direct structural and
functional interface between live bone and an artificial implant
surface without any intervening fibrous connective tissue. Biocompatibility is a prerequisite for osseointegration.
Risk Combination of the probability of harm to health occurring
as a result of adverse reactions associated with a biomaterial
interaction and the severity of that harm.
Safety The absence (freedom) from unacceptable risks in the
context of the intended use.
Xenoestrogen A chemical that is not indigenous to the body but
acts in a manner similar to that of estrogen.

BIOLOGICAL OR CLINICAL EFFECTS
Allergy A clinical hypersensitivity reaction initiated by specific
immunological mechanisms.

Carcinogenicity Malignant tumor formation caused, for example,
by an exposure to a chemical or biomaterial.
Cytotoxicity Cell death or impairment of cell metabolism caused
by an exposure to a chemical or biomaterial.
Estrogenicity Body reaction in a manner similar to that of estrogen, the female sex hormone, from exposure to a chemical or
biomaterial.
Genotoxicity A change of the DNA or of chromosomes caused, for
example, by an exposure to a chemical or biomaterial.
Hypersensitivity The objectively reproducible symptoms or signs
initiated by an exposure to a defined stimulus at a dose tolerated by normal persons.
Mutagenicity A change of the DNA or of chromosomes, which is
transferred to the next cell generation, caused, for example, by
an exposure to a chemical or biomaterial.
Sensitization The process by which antibodies or specific immune
cells are produced, which react specifically to the causative
foreign substance.
Toxicity The relative ability (dose-related effect) of a substance
or a material to cause injury to biological tissues, ranging
from improper biochemical function, organ damage, and cell
destruction to death. Depending on the duration of exposure
period, the terms acute toxicity (≤24 hours), subacute toxicity
(>24 hours but ≤30 days), and chronic toxicity (>30 days) are
used.

LIMIT VALUES
Lethal dose fifty (LD50) The calculated dose of a substance that is
expected to cause the death of 50% of the entire population of
a biological collective, such as specific experimental animals or
cells.
No-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) The highest tested
dose of a substance that has been reported to have no harmful
(adverse) health effects on people, animals, or cells.

355

356

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Since ancient times, a wide variety of materials have been placed
or implanted in humans to replace or repair missing, damaged,
or defective body tissues. Animal bones, seashells, animal teeth,
human teeth, metals, resin materials, and inorganic compounds
are materials that have been used for restoration of damaged or
decayed teeth or replacement of missing teeth. The outcomes of
these interventions have varied from short-term failure to limited
success in certain individuals. Many of these treatments reflected
situations in which the risks were far greater than the anticipated benefits. Some of these materials have caused immediate
or delayed adverse reactions because of their allergenic or toxic
potentials. On the other hand, some materials appear to evoke a
minimal biological response but seem to interact with the host tissue harmoniously. Thus the term biocompatible evolves.

Basic Concept of Biocompatibility
Biocompatibility is related to the fact that a (dental) material that
is placed on or in parts of the human body comes into close contact
with living tissue, with the consequence of an interaction between
the material and the tissue. This interaction is primarily based
on the substances that are eluted (i.e., released) from the material when in contact with various tissues; released substances then
in turn influence the living tissues (Figure 17-1). Furthermore,
such released substances can influence the surrounding microbiota (e.g., biofilms), which then indirectly affects the tissue, such
as inducing a bacterial inflammation. Nanoparticles originating
from dental materials during processing (grinding or polishing)
or during restoration removal can also interact with cells. Finally,
the influence of disposing dental material wastes to the environment has gained increased concern. For example, amalgam debris
discharged from dental offices enters water treatment plants and
then landfills as sewage waste. The mercury in amalgam is released
to ground water or air and eventually enters the food chain, which
may influence human health. Thus the primary purpose of characterizing the biocompatibility of dental materials is the protection
of the patient, the dental personnel, and the environment.
The adverse effects of a material lead to the awareness of biocompatibility. Adverse reactions caused by dental restorative materials
can be classified into three groups: systemic effects, local effects,
and allergies. Systemic effects are those where the site of application

Release of substances,
nanoparticles

Waste

is distant from the site of action. For example, mercury vapor
from amalgam fillings reaches different organs through inhalation
and then the bloodstream, with (claimed) adverse effects at these
organs (Figure 17-2). Local effects occur in the direct vicinity of the
material applied. This can be an inflammation of the dental pulp
after placement of a resin-based composite restoration in a deep
cavity or inflammation of the gingiva next to a resin-based restoration (Figure 17-3) or a metal prosthesis (Figure 17-4). Allergies
are based on an immunological antibody–antigen reaction leading
to a number of clinical symptoms that occur more frequently than
systemic effects. The adverse effects are discussed in detail in the
next section.
Bioactivity can be regarded as an intended positive local effect
of dental materials in addition to their primary function (e.g.,
to restore dental hard tissues). The term bio means “life/living.”
Therefore bioactive effects are primarily related to material-induced
and cell-mediated effects on living tissues like the dental pulp.
Examples are the induction of new dentin formation by calcium
hydroxide products. Also, antimicrobial activity may be regarded
as a bioactive effect. Some manufacturers and authors broaden the
term bioactivity to include a mainly inorganic chemically induced
remineralization of dental hard tissues or the formation of an apatite-like substance on the surface. Therefore materials that release
Ca2+, (PO4)3–, or F–, which are necessary components for forming apatite, are termed bioactive materials or smart materials by
manufacturers. The clinician should be critical and ask for actual
clinical evidence of such claims based on clinical studies and
ensure that the necessary properties of the restorative materials
for fulfilling their primary use are not impaired as a result of the
release of molecules.
In daily life, the assessment of the biocompatibility of dental
materials is often expressed in terms of risk and safety. “Safety”
in layperson terms is often meant to describe a situation where
harm will never happen. But such an “absolute safety” is not possible. There is always a chance, however small it may be, that an
adverse event may happen. Interestingly, high-risk activities, such
as mountain climbing, are engaged in by patients without any
major concern, but the same patients are afraid of certain dental materials (e.g., amalgam) or of certain procedures (e.g., dental x-rays). This indicates that the risk perception of the patient
is purely intuitive, and it is not related to the actual risk. The

Environment,
e.g., water treatment plants,
ground water, fish, atmosphere

Food chain

Contact of tissue/tissue fluids,
e.g., gingiva, pulp, saliva with materials
Nanoparticles

Material

Release of substances

Tissue
Barriers

Release of substances/
surface effects

Bacteria
accumulation

• Figure 17-1 Basic concept of the interaction of dental materials with tissues. Orange arrows indicate
the action of the tissues on the material. Cyan arrows show the action of the materials/their eluates on
the tissues, and brown arrows show the bacteria-mediated interaction. Blue arrows indicate the effect of
materials on the environment, which then also may influence human health. (Adapted from Schmalz G,
Galler KM: Biocompatibility of biomaterials, Dent Mater 33:382–393, 2017.)

CHAPTER 17

Biocompatibility

LOCAL EFFECTS

SYSTEMIC EFFECTS

Skin, lips, and oral mucosa
Inflammation: Non-allergic, allergic
Allergy: Burning mouth, erythema,
vesicles, lichenoid lesions
Cause: Metals, acrylics, latex

Toxicity: Neurobehavioral effects,
multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer,
Parkinson disease, epilepsy
Cause: Unknown

357

Brain and nervous system

Lung
Toxicity: Pneumoconiosis
Cause: Silica, beryllium, asbestos,
grinding dusts, vapors, fumes

• Figure 17-2 Schematic illustration of critical tissues and organs that may be susceptible to the adverse
effects of dental materials.

• Figure 17-3 Inflammatory response or possible allergic reaction adjacent to a Class V resin-based composite. However, no patch test was
performed to confirm an allergy as the cause of this inflammation. (Courtesy Dr. Hyun-Ju Chung.)

actual risk is the combination of the probability and the severity of harm that can be evaluated according to ISO 14971:2019,
Medical Devices—Application of Risk Management to Medical
Devices. Therefore, when informing the patients about possible
adverse effects from dental materials, the clinician must consider
the difference between the public’s perception and the measurable
estimation in terms of risk and safety by ISO 14971:2019.
Finally, risk versus benefit has to be assessed before a material is
allowed to be sold on the market. Dental (and medical) materials
are used to diagnose, prevent, and alleviate disease (e.g., caries)
or restore lost teeth structure. An example is mercury, which is
an element that is poisonous to human health and has been used
to form amalgam as a dental restoration for restoring function of
teeth damaged by caries. However, mercury should not be used in
shoes to switch on lights for fun.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Why might the local response and the systemic response to a dental material
differ? Which factors come into play to explain these differences?

• Figure 17-4 Inflammatory response adjacent to a crown (lower right)
made from a metal coping. No definitive diagnosis can be made of potential allergens. Thorough dental and medical histories and patch testing are
required for the evaluation of this condition. (Courtesy Dr. Hyun-Ju Chung.)

Biological Effects From Exposure to Dental
Materials
There are five main pathways through which harmful substances
can enter the body: (1) absorption through skin/mucosa/dentin
and eye contact, (2) leakage through the tooth apex, (3) direct
contact with bone (implants), (4) inhalation, and (5) ingestion.
Keep in mind that skin, mucosa, and dentin act as a (partial) barrier against the entry of foreign substances into the body. If this
protective barrier is broken by abrasions or lacerations, toxic substances can penetrate the barrier and migrate into the body. In
addition, exposure to some organic solvents or inorganic acids can
increase the permeability of the skin, mucosa, and dentin. The
fastest way for toxic substances to enter the body is through inhalation (Figure 17-2) or in direct contact with bone. Inhaled vapors
or particulate matter can make immediate contact with respiratory
tissues and soon thereafter make contact with the bloodstream.
Once a substance has entered the bloodstream, this substance is
transported rapidly throughout the body.

358

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Systemic Effects of Materials
Systemic effects from dental materials are a function of the distribution of substances released from dental materials in the body. Their
migration to other sites of the body can occur by diffusion through
tissues or by flow through lymphatic channels or blood vessels.
The ultimate systemic response depends on six key variables: (1)
site of exposure, (2) the intrinsic (i.e., molecular) toxicity, (3) the
effective concentration of the substance at the site of action, (4)
the time of exposure, (5) the excretion rate of the substance, and
(6) the target organ (site of action). When substances are excreted
slowly, their critical concentrations are reached more rapidly than
are those concentrations of substances that are excreted quickly.

CMR Effects
The term CMR effects refers to carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, and
reproductive toxicity. Any adverse effect on the DNA of an organism caused by a chemical or a material is termed genotoxicity. If
the adverse effect is transferred to the next (heritable) generation
of cells, the effect is called mutagenicity. Thus genotoxicity can
be regarded as the first and necessary step for mutagenicity. Genotoxic reactions occur when a physical or chemical agent changes
the genetic material of an organism. Mutations are common
occurrences in the DNA of all humans, and they may result from
many factors, such as radiation, genotoxic chemicals, and genetic
errors in the DNA replication process. Several metal ions, such as
beryllium, cobalt, and nickel, are known mutagens. Some components in root canal sealers and resin-based materials have exhibited
mutagenic potential in vitro. Mutagenicity does not have the same
consequences as carcinogenicity, and many mutations are repaired.
Others are irrelevant or insignificant, or the affected cell undergoes
apoptosis, preventing the transfer of the DNA damage to the next
cell generation. No dental material has ever been shown to be carcinogenic in dental patients. Reproductive toxicity plays virtually no
role in dental materials but has to be considered during preclinical
risk assessments performed by the manufacturer.
Estrogenicity
Estrogenicity is the ability of a chemical to act as the hormone
estrogen does in the body. If these chemicals are not indigenous to
the body, the substances are called xenoestrogens. In 1996 Olea
et al. claimed that dental sealants released estrogenic substances in
sufficient quantities to warrant concern. The compound of concern
is called bisphenol-A (BPA), which is a precursor of the bisphenolA glycidyl dimethacrylate (bis-GMA) monomer widely used in the
formulation of dental composites and sealants and a building block
of plastics like the polycarbonates used in some orthodontic brackets. BPA is a known xenoestrogen. The fear is that the release of
these substances from dental materials will compound exposure to
other (nondental) sources of endocrine disruptors, which in turn
may lead to (claimed!) diseases such as type 2 diabetes, obesity,
premature puberty, and even (breast) cancer, albeit such claims are
highly controversial. The amounts of BPA released from dental resin
composites are very low. Therefore the estrogenicity of dental composites has also been questioned, particularly for use in children. For
more details, see the discussion on resin-based composites.

Local Effects of Materials
The arrows in Figure 17-5 indicate the pathways that foreign substances from a restorative material can take leading into the oral
cavity (OC), the tissue space next to the periodontium (PD), the

R
OC
D

P

PD

PA

• Figure 17-5 Schematic illustration of pathways that leached ions or
substances may follow during in vivo degradation of a dental restoration
(R) into the oral cavity (OC), dentin (D), the pulp chamber and the pulp tissue (P), the periodontium (PD), and periapical tissue and bone (PA).

pulp chamber (P), or the periapical region (PA). Local effects that
occur on nearby oral tissues such as the buccal mucosa, the periodontium, or tongue are generally apparent to visual inspection.
Local effects also occur, often hidden from our eyesight, including
in the pulp tissue, tooth–restoration interfaces, and bone–implant
interfaces.

Pulp Tissue
Postoperative discomfort/sensitivity or pain, which may occur
shortly after the treatment with dental restorative materials, may
result from several factors, including thermal trauma, chemical
injury, microleakage, and allergy. The perception of this postoperative sensitivity is generally believed to be related to the movement
of extracellular fluid in the dentinal tubules and the influence of
this fluid movement on the odontoblastic processes, as proposed
in the so-called hydrodynamic theory of postoperative sensitivity.
As a result of this movement, cell receptors on the surface of the
odontoblast processes are stimulated, and the odontoblasts transfer this signal to afferent nerves, which are closely associated with
the odontoblast layer. Therefore sealing the dentinal tubules during the restorative procedure is clinically important to prevent
or reduce intratubular fluid movement and thus postoperative
sensitivity.
Pulp damage (inflammation) caused by a restorative material
may very often occur without any clinical symptoms at the beginning and is only detected histologically. The intratubular fluid
becomes the medium for the diffusion of foreign substances into
the pulp chamber. However, the thickness of the remaining dentin
between the material and the pulp chamber can slow down the
process, and dentinal sclerosis under a carious lesion will further
decrease the dentin permeability. Furthermore, dentin may act as
a buffer for acidic substances like self-etch adhesives. Therefore
dentin can be regarded as a partial barrier. A major problem in the

CHAPTER 17

diagnosis of potential pulp damage caused by a restoration is the
fact that there is virtually no correlation between the histologically
documented damage to the pulp and clinical symptoms. This is
considered a major drawback of clinical studies (without histology) in this area.

Dentin
Enamel
“Pocket”

Pulp
chamber

Cementum

Cortical
bone

Periodontium
The periodontal attachment to the tooth is an important junction
between the outside of the body (oral cavity) and the inside of the
body (Figure 17-6). The periodontal tissues are targets for possible adverse effects from dental materials because these materials
are in close proximity to these tissues. The periodontal pocket, or
gingival sulcus, may accumulate biofilms and significant concentrations of ions or molecules of leached substances. Such accumulations can elicit inflammatory reactions such as gingivitis or
influence the body’s ability to defend against bacteria that cause
periodontal disease.

How can microleakage influence the biological response to a material?

Periodontal
ligament

Alveolar
bone

Spongy
bone

• Figure 17-6 Schematic illustration of the periodontal attachment area.
The gingiva is attached to the tooth’s cementum surface just below the
enamel with a specialized epithelium, which is called the junctional epithelium. The periodontal “pocket” is formed from the gingival tissue extension
above the junctional epithelium. Cementum covers the dentin, starting at
the enamel–dentin junction. Below the gingiva, alveolar bone attaches to
cementum through a tissue called the periodontal ligament. This ligament
is not present when implants are osseointegrated with bone.

Tooth–Restoration Interfaces—Microleakage and
Nanoleakage
Dental restorative materials form interfaces with one another (adhesives with resin composites or cements with dental alloys) and with
the dental hard tissues. The tooth–restoration interface is critical
for the transfer of leached substances into dentinal fluid. As shown
in Figure 17-7, debonding of the adhesive layer from the dentin,
as a result of, for example, polymerization stress, can lead to fluid
ingress along gaps, which leads to so-called microleakage, or the diffusion of bacteria and fluids into this gap. The microscopic gap and
the microleakage may lead to several undesirable events. Bacteria
may migrate into this gap and may even form a thin biofilm, which
then initiates an inflammation of the pulp tissue. The gap also promotes material breakdown and secondary caries along the unsupported margin. This breakdown increases the gap width, which
allows larger particles and molecules to progress toward the pulp
chamber. The presence of this gap also causes marginal staining and
compromised esthetics that may lead to restoration replacement.
If the resin from dental adhesives penetrates the collagen
network of the acid-treated dentin but does not penetrate the

Composite resin

Resin-impregnated
collagen mesh

Microleakage

R

Partially demineralized
dentin

Nanoleakage

DT

Unaffected
dentin

D

A

359

CRITICAL QUESTION

Junctional
epithelium

Gingiva

Biocompatibility

B
• Figure 17-7 Concepts of microleakage and nanoleakage. A, Cross section of Class I composite restoration. B, Diagram illustrating the interphase of bonding resins (R) to dentin (D). The dentin has been
acid-etched in preparation for the application of the resin adhesive, which leaves the collagenous matrix of
the dentin exposed (demineralized dentin). If the resin does not completely penetrate the collagen network
(left), then a small space of communication exists between the tubules (DT) and the collagen network
(red arrow, left). This situation allows for nanoleakage. On the other hand, if the resin fails to penetrate the
collagen network at all, or debonds from it, then the space is much larger (red arrow, right). This situation
allows for microleakage. In the ideal situation (center), the resin penetrates the collagen network all the
way to the mineralized dentin.

360

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

network completely, then a much smaller gap (less than 0.1 μm in
most cases) may develop between the mineralized matrix of dentin and the collagen–resin hybrid layer (Figure 17-7). This much
smaller gap may lead to nanoleakage, which probably does not
permit bacteria penetration but allows fluid exchange that may
degrade the resin or the collagen network and subsequently reduce
the longevity of the dentin–resin bond.
Micromechanical interlocking occurs between the bonding of
resins from dental adhesives to enamel. Enamel does not contain
collagens, and the bond to resin is based on the interlocking of the
resin with the etched enamel surface and potentially on chemical
bonding between the resin and the enamel apatite (for 10-methacryloyloxydecyl dihydrogen phosphate [MDP]-based adhesives).
Therefore nanoleakage is not known to occur between restorations
and enamel.

Bone–Implant Interface
The success of endosseous dental implants depends on the stability of the implant, which is determined by the biomechanical properties of the bone–implant interface. The initial stability
is gained from introducing the implant into a prepared cavity slightly smaller than the size of implant, which allows the
implants to be threaded into bone. The final stability is achieved
by the ingrowth and integration of new bone onto the implant
surface through the process of osseointegration. Materials that
allow osseointegration have very low degradation rates, and they
tend to form biocompatible surface oxides that enhance bony
approximation. The general process of biointegration involves
the adaptation of bone or other tissue to the implanted material
without any intervening space along the tissue–material interface. The majority of current dental implants are made of commercially pure titanium or titanium alloys (Chapter 12, Titanium
and Titanium Alloys).

A

B

Allergic Reactions
An allergic reaction occurs when the body recognizes a substance,
molecule, or ion as foreign, and the human immune system can
react specifically even at a very low dose. The reactions are well
recognized by the public, but specific allergens are difficult for
health care professionals to identify.
There are four types of allergy reactions according to the Gell
and Coombs classification of immune responses proposed in
1963. A type I reaction (mediated by immunoglobulin E [IgE]
or immunoglobulin G4 [IgG4]) is an immediate hypersensitive reaction or anaphylactic reaction when an antigen interacts
with mast cells or basophils. A type II reaction is caused by cytotoxic antibodies, which are primarily immunoglobulin M (IgM)
or immunoglobulin G (IgG). A type III reaction involves tissue
injury by immune complexes. A type IV reaction is a delayed or
cell-mediated hypersensitivity, and it is evoked, for example, by
metal ions, which, as so-called haptens, must first interact with a
host molecule (protein) in order to be able to produce a delayed
type IV hypersensitivity reaction. This type is often associated
with an allergic contact dermatitis. A type V reaction, which is a
stimulating antibody reaction, has been suggested but sometimes
classified as a subcategory of type II. In dentistry, allergy type IV
reactions (delayed type) are generally more frequent than type I
reactions (immediate reactions).
Figure 17-8 illustrates three potential sites for allergic reactions
to nickel-containing metals: a watchband buckle (Figure 17-8,
A); bilateral, fixed metal-ceramic prostheses with copings and

C
• Figure 17-8 Various forms of nickel allergy. A, Allergic reaction to nickel
alloy in watchband buckle. B, Bilateral erythema in a female patient that
may have been associated with allergic reactions to nickel in a recently
cemented metal-ceramic crown (left) and in two metal-ceramic crowns
(right) of a three-unit fixed dental prosthesis. C, Severe allergic reaction in
the lips of a patient who was exposed to a nickel-containing orthodontic
wire. (C, Courtesy Dr. Donald Cohen.)

framework made from nickel alloy (Figure 17-8, B); and a severe
reaction of lips to nickel-containing wire (Figure 17-8, C).

Frequencies
Dental professionals suffer hand dermatitis from frequent hand
washing, prolonged glove use, and exposure to skin-irritating and
skin-sensitizing chemicals in their working environment, particularly methacrylate-based monomers. In one study, nearly 2% of
dental personnel were reported to suffer from methacrylate-caused
hand dermatitis. Contact allergy to methacrylate was seen in 22%
of the patch-tested persons. Other frequent allergens are nickel,
cobalt, palladium, fragrance mix, colophonium, and thiuram mix.
Allergy to natural rubber latex was diagnosed in 10% of the dental
personnel. In summary, chemical-irritant hand dermatitis was the
dominant diagnosis.

CHAPTER 17

Dental patients usually present with different manifestations
of the oral mucosa. In a group of more than 4000 people with a
clinically suspected allergy against dental materials, the most frequent allergic patch test reactions in the dental screening series
were induced by nickel, ammoniated mercury, metallic mercury,
gold, benzoic acid, palladium, cobalt, and 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA). Moreover, triethylene glycol dimethacrylate
(TEGDMA) was found to be a frequent sensitizer. Other studies
have reported chromium and indium as allergens. Positive reactions to metals were frequent in patients with different symptoms,
and no specific association between a specific clinical presentation
and a particular allergen was found.
A maximal frequency of 0.3% for any adverse effect and for all
dental materials has been reported, meaning the frequency of just
allergic reactions of patients may be even lower. Within the group
of patients claiming that their subjective complaints or objective
symptoms are the result of applied dental materials, the rate of allergic reactions was found to range between 10% and 14%. Within
another group of patients who also exhibit clinical symptoms of
an allergy (see following discussion), the rate of positive patch tests
(i.e., verification of an allergy) was between 40% and 60%.

361

cells specifically directed to this substance. After sensitization to
the particular substance, even a brief contact with that allergen
may cause the allergic reaction to appear. Dental materials mainly
elicit delayed-type reactions (type IV), occurring within 24 to 48
hours or even later. A typical type IV reaction to dental materials
is contact dermatitis. One of the most common signs is a change
in the color of the skin/mucosa, which usually appears on the spot
that was in contact with the material. Other areas of the body can
exhibit signs after the initial reaction has occurred. The general
signs of contact allergies include (1) reddish, itchy, swollen skin;
(2) vesicles; (3) scaly areas; (4) darkening of affected tissue; (5)
leathery skin; and (6) cracked skin. The best “cures” for these reactions are avoidance of the suspected materials.

Inflammation
Inflammation may result from microbes/biofilms, trauma (i.e.,
excessive force, laceration, and abrasion), allergy, or toxicity. Histologically, the inflammatory response is initially characterized by
edema of the tissue and by an infiltration of inflammatory cells
such as neutrophils and, later in the chronic stage, by the action of
monocytes/macrophages and lymphocytic cells. For the clinician,
it is important to identify the reason for an apparent inflammation
in order to be able to correctly treat the patient.
A rather frequent reason for an inflammation of the oral soft
tissues/oral mucosa is bacterial biofilms on or under a dental
material. Antibacterial treatment comprises mechanical cleaning of teeth and possibly removable prostheses, improving the
patient’s own oral hygiene measures, and the use of antiseptic
mouth rinses. If the inflammation subsides, bacterial biofilm can
be regarded as the reason for the inflammation. If the inflammation persists, and the suspected material is part of a removable
prosthesis, this prosthesis should be removed from the mouth
for 1 or 2 weeks (elimination test). If the inflammation subsides
and reappears after insertion, an allergy can be suspected, and a
patch test should be initiated. Figure 17-10 shows an erythematous reaction caused by an acrylic appliance that subsided 2 to 3
days after removal of the appliance. The same is true if inflammation persists after antimicrobial treatment and the material
cannot be removed from the mouth. Other material-associated
soft tissue inflammations are caused by marginal discrepancies of
metallic fixed prostheses (Chapter 9, Manipulation of Base-Metal
Alloys) and ill-fitting removable prostheses (Chapter 11, Allergic
Reactions). Gingivitis adjacent to metal-ceramic crowns may also
be caused by insufficient removal of metal oxides after the firing

Symptoms
For dental personnel with a verified allergy to dental materials,
the symptoms found among 174 cases were hand eczema (63%),
irritant contact dermatitis (67%), and allergy-induced contact
dermatitis (33%). Further diagnoses included other eczemas, urticaria, rosacea, psoriasis, tinea pedis, and bullous pemphigoid.
Exposure of patients to dental materials and other products can
elicit symptoms such as burning, tingling, cheilitis, and oral lichenoid contact lesions, as well as swelling of the face, lips, tongue, palate, and buccal mucosa. Between 2000 and 2004, patch tests of
121 patients aged 20 to 80 years revealed that the most frequent
oral manifestations were cheilitis and perioral dermatitis (25.6%),
burning mouth (15.7%), lichenoid contact reaction (14.0%), and
orofacial granulomatosis (10.7%). Dental personnel, representing
18 (14.9%) of the 121 patients, all suffered from hand dermatitis.
Intraorally, so-called lichenoid contact lesions (Figure 17-9) have
been associated with an allergic reaction to amalgam and dental
alloys. Also, other causes, such as mechanical irritation, have,
however, been considered as a cause for such contact lesions. The
generalized oral lichen planus is not associated with an allergy.
An allergic reaction only occurs after the patient has been sensitized during a first contact by developing antibodies or immune

A

Biocompatibility

B

• Figure 17-9 Bilateral localized lichenoid lesions that are associated with gold alloy crowns. A, Lichenoid mucositis lesion (white area) in tissue adjacent to a gold alloy crown. B, Lichenoid mucositis lesion in
vestibular tissue next to gold alloy crown on opposite side of the arch. Patch testing of the patient was not
performed. (Courtesy Dr. Donald Cohen.)

362

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

A

B

C

• Figure 17-10 Erythematous reaction sites. Patch testing was not performed to confirm a suspected
allergic response. A, Palatal area that was exposed to an acrylic palatal appliance. B, Acrylic appliance
with embedded wire. C, Initial healing of palatal tissue shown in (A) within 2 to 3 days after removal of the
palatal appliance. (Courtesy Dr. Byung-Gook Kim.)

• Figure 17-11 Inflammation adjacent to the metal margin of a metal-ceramic crown. A potential allergy to one of the metal components should be
explored by a patch test. Furthermore, gingival reactions to metal oxides
that were produced during the firing process for metal-ceramic crowns
have also been proposed. (Courtesy Dr. Hyun-Ju Chung.)

process (Figure 17-11). In those cases, the prostheses are adjusted
or remade to eliminate the inflammation.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the task of the clinician when an allergy is suspected?

Patch Test
A patch test is only indicated for patients who exhibit clinical
symptoms suspected to be a type IV allergy. Because this type of
allergy is most prominent for dental materials, the patch test is
mainly performed to verify the allergenic nature of the clinical
symptoms. A series of substances, which are suspected to cause the
allergy, is placed on the back of the patient in tiny reservoirs and
covered by a patch. Figure 17-12 illustrates positive responses of
dental alloys on a patient’s back. Patch testing in general has been
validated for epidermal exposure, which may also induce sensitization of naive T lymphocytes and is relevant primarily for detecting dermal effects of hypersensitivity (contact dermatitis). In vitro
testing, for example, with the lymphocyte transformation test
(LTT), has been proposed but so far has not found general acceptance by relevant scientific organizations (e.g., American Academy
of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology [AAAI]; see https://www
.aaaai.org/ask-the-expert/lymphocyte).

• Figure 17-12 Positive responses to patch tests on a patient’s back.
(Courtesy Dr. Young Ho Won.)

All testing for verifying allergies has to be performed by an
allergologist, and the referring dentist must provide a list of suspected substances. Tests may be performed with samples of the
suspected material (e.g., the alloy) or with the components, such
as the cations from metals that are components of the alloy. The
use of metal cations and monomers is generally more sensitive
than using material samples and is the standard procedure. Therefore information on the composition of the used materials is
essential (see the Safety Data Sheets section later in the chapter).

Immunotoxicity
The principal concept of immunotoxicity is that substances can
alter the immune system. These cellular alterations can occur
because of the direct toxic effect of a leached substance. Monocytes/macrophages control chronic inflammatory and immune
responses, and they also secrete many substances, such as signaling
molecules, that alter the actions of other cells. Thus, if substances
leached from a biomaterial reduce the monocyte’s ability to secrete
these substances, this may impair the immune system.
Released substances from dental materials, such as metal ions
or monomers, can also alter the immune system at subtoxic concentrations. As shown in Figure 17-13, mercury ions increase the
glutathione (GSH) content of human monocytes in cell culture,
whereas palladium ions decrease the cells’ GSH content. GSH

CHAPTER 17

363

250
TNF-alpha secretion (pg/mL)

6

5
Hg2+

Glutathione/cell (pg)

Biocompatibility

4

3

+LPS

200

150

100

50
–LPS

2
0

Control

Pd2+

1

1000

4000

Concentration of HEMA (µM)

• Figure 17-14 Reduction in secretion of tumor necrosis factor alpha
0
0.1

1
10
100
Metal ion concentration (µM)

1000

• Figure 17-13 Response of monocytes in a cell culture after a 24-hour
exposure to mercury ions (Hg2+) or palladium ions (Pd2+). Mercury ions
produced a spike in glutathione at an ion concentration of about 8 μmol/L
and a subsequent decrease as mercury became toxic to the cells. In contrast, during exposure to palladium ions, the glutathione content did not
decrease significantly until the palladium ion concentration increased to
between 200 and 300 μmol/L, which is far below the ion concentrations
required to induce toxicity in these cells. Because both types of metal ions
alter the chemical defense (glutathione production) against oxidative stress
at subtoxic ion levels, these metals are believed to affect the immune system. (Courtesy Dr. John Wataha.)

is a tripeptide and is necessary for maintaining the redox balance in cells because GSH compensates for the constantly and
physiologically generated reactive oxygen species (ROS). GSH
is also responsible for the detoxification of foreign substances
entering the cell. However, if the concentration of the foreign
substance is increasing, the cellular GSH is depleted (as a result
of the detoxification), and the redox balance is impaired. The
consequence is cellular stress as a result of the increased ROS concentration. Thus, necessary cell functions in the immune system
are impaired.
A further effect on the immune system is a result of the influence of substances from dental materials on the cellular bacterial
defense system. Bacterial surface antigens, such as lipopolysaccharides (LPSs) from gram-negative bacteria or lipoteichoic acid from
gram-positive bacteria, are recognized by the immune cell surface
receptors of human macrophages, which then, through intracellular signal transduction, results in the release of interleukin-1 (IL-1)
or interleukin-6 (IL-6) or tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α).
These substances are secreted to induce inflammation, with the
aim of eliminating the invading bacteria (bacterial clearance).
Figure 17-14 shows a graph of the amount of TNF-α secreted
by monocytes after LPS stimulation (control) and after additional exposure to HEMA in different concentrations. Exposure
to HEMA clearly reduced the TNF-α secretion and therefore
impaired bacterial clearance. The significance of this effect is that
the relatively small amounts of HEMA released from, for example,
dental adhesives can alter the normal functions of immune cells,

(TNF-α) by monocytes after exposure to different concentrations of hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA). The TNF-α secretion shown on the yaxis is plotted against the HEMA concentration on the x-axis for cells that
were either stimulated by lipopolysaccharide (+LPS) or not stimulated by
lipopolysaccharide (−LPS). HEMA reduces the immune response toward
LPS/bacteria. (Courtesy Dr. John Wataha.)

thereby contributing to the potential immunotoxicity of some
dental materials.

Effect on the Environment
Dental practice generates not only sharps and infectious waste
but also chemical waste. In many countries the disposal of special chemical waste is regulated by laws. For example, any residues
from placing amalgam fillings, such as scraps or used amalgam
capsules, have to be disposed of properly. Of special importance
are amalgam particles produced during the removal of amalgam
restorations. So-called amalgam separators have been developed in
order to remove—according to ISO 11143—at least 95% of these
particles from the effluent water of dental practices. Within the
Minamata Convention of 2013, aimed at reducing the discharge
of mercury into the environment worldwide, the installation of
such amalgam separators has been mentioned as one provision to
reduce the mercury discharge from dental practices. Such particles
are also generated during the removal of other restorative materials, such as resin composites.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the obligations of the clinician to prevent occupational hazards for
the practice team?

Occupational Hazards for Dental Personnel
Dental technicians are exposed to significantly more metallic elements and monomers than the general population. Inhalation and
aspiration of various dust and toxic vapors, which are generated
during the heating, melting, and finishing of certain alloys and
the processing of resin materials, may irritate the respiratory and
gastrointestinal systems of these technicians and may cause toxic
or allergic reactions.

364

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Pneumoconiosis is a severe fibrotic lung disease that can be
caused by chronic exposure to inorganic dust. A 1993 epidemiological study reported a prevalence of this lung disease in
approximately 15% of dental technicians after 20 years or more
of exposure. The prevalence in the general population is less than
1%. Pneumoconiosis is caused by dust that is generated during
the finishing of base-metal frameworks and comprises silica and
silicon carbide from abrasives (Chapter 16, Biological Hazards of
Abrasive Procedures); asbestos; or alloys such as Co-Cr, Co-CrMo, and Ni-Cr-Be. Silicosis is the most common occupational
disease among dental technicians. According to the World Health
Organization (WHO) International Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC), beryllium and beryllium compounds are carcinogenic to humans. The incidence of pneumoconiosis increases
significantly among dental technicians working in laboratories
with insufficient dust-handling facilities. However, such lung diseases may occur only if currently recognized safety precautions
(see following discussion) are not followed. Furthermore, there is
no evidence to suggest that metallic dental restorations increase
carcinogenic risks in patients.
Dental technicians also report more allergic contact dermatitis
than the general population because they have frequent contact
with alloys or methacrylate-based monomers, such as methylmethactylate (MMA). However, data on the frequency of such
reactions among dental technicians vary from slight to major risks.
Improved safety measures in dental laboratories have reduced the
frequency of contact dermatitis from allergen exposure, although
wearing gloves may increase the allergic reaction to latex. The
most frequent allergens are different acrylates, followed by metals
like palladium and nickel.
Adverse occupational reactions are common for dental office
personnel exhibiting various forms of hand or facial contact
dermatitis, as well as respiratory disease. Contact-type reactions
occurred most often because of exposure to acrylates, formaldehyde, fragrances, latex, and rubber additives. Allergic reactions
to latex gloves are well recognized for dental office staff. Metallic
dental materials do not seem to be a major occupational hazard
for dental personnel. The special problems related to mercury handling are described later in the chapter (Dental Amalgam section).
Also, allergic respiratory problems such as asthma, rhinitis,
and laryngitis have been reported for dental personnel, especially
by dental auxiliary personnel. The reason is exposure to different
acrylates, usually those contained in dental adhesives. If a type I
reaction is suspected, a prick test (pricking the skin on the inner
side of the forearm with a needle or pin containing a small amount
of the allergen) can be performed.
Since the last century, dentists have worn gloves when treating patients, mainly to reduce the risk of microbial transmission.
However, wearing gloves does not protect against the exposure of
the skin to substances like monomers. Therefore a so-called “notouch-technique” is recommended to avoid contact of uncured
materials with both protected and unprotected skin.

Biocompatibility Testing
Biological testing of materials has evolved significantly since the
1950s and 1960s. Comparability of test results between laboratories was soon recognized to be possible only if test methods
were standardized. In 1980 the Fédération Internationale Dentaire (FDI) published its “Recommended Standard Practices for
Biological Evaluation of Dental Materials.” In the same year,
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/American Dental

Association (ADA) Specification No. 41, under the same title,
became effective. Both documents were a collection of generally
accepted standardized test methods and represented great progress
toward the establishment of biological test programs for dental
materials. The FDI recommendation has led to the publication
of ISO 7405:1997, Preclinical Evaluation of Biocompatibility
of Medical Devices Used in Dentistry—Test Methods for Dental Materials. This ISO standard was revised in 2008 and 2018.
Meanwhile, ANSI/ADA No. 41 was also revised extensively and is
now largely identical to ISO 7405:2018.

Purpose of Biocompatibility Testing
The primary purpose of biocompatibility testing is to protect
dental patients, dental personnel, and the environment. Before
the actual testing, there is a clinical risk assessment for the new
material that needs to be completed. This risk assessment must
take into consideration the intended function of the material in
the mouth, the physical and chemical characteristics, the material’s release of substances, location, and the time of exposure. The
outcome of the clinical risk assessment determines the tests to be
performed.
The law requires that the manufacturer provides a clinical
risk assessment together with necessary tests as a prerequisite for
market access of new materials and for newly emerging risks for
materials that are already on the market (see Legal Requirements
section). The clinician should be familiar with the basic concepts
of biocompatibility testing in order to be able to critically evaluate the claims of the manufacturers. As such, the discussion of the
evaluation of biological effects of dental materials is based on the
principles of (1) the release of substances to reach these sites, (2)
their intrinsic (i.e., molecular) toxicity, (3) their concentrations,
and (4) the exposure times, which may range from seconds to
years. Finally, the relevant tests have to be performed and the risks
fully evaluated.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can a material exhibiting no obvious biological effects by itself alter body
functions?

Release of Substances From Materials
Each biomaterial can degrade and release components under certain environmental and physical conditions. The environment–
material interface is an active site for the corrosion of alloys that
alters the material’s surface structure and releases metallic ions to
the body. A decline in pH may also occur at the biofilm–material
interface after intake of cariogenic food and may increase the corrosion of certain dental alloys and the release of substances from
glass-ionomer cements (GICs). A change in the environment
caused by acidic substances such as citrus juices or regurgitated
hydrochloric acid can alter the surfaces of ceramics. On the other
hand, high-pH environments may also increase the dissolution of
some materials, such as glass-phase ceramics. Another factor that
increases the potential for the release of substances is the surface
roughness of a restoration or prosthesis. Rough surfaces promote
the corrosion of alloys and the liberation of monomers and catalysts from resin materials.
Unfinished surfaces of resin composites and pit-and-fissure sealants have an oxygen-inhibited outer layer that may be more susceptible to leaching monomers or impurities such as bisphenol A.

CHAPTER 17

Also, unpolymerized monomers or other unreacted components
of set resin composites can be liberated over time. For resin-based
composites, the lipophilicity of the environment is important,
and more substances are eluted, for example, in ethanol compared
with water. The release of substances generally declines after setting, as was shown for resin composites. However, substances are
also released over an extended period of time.

Biocompatibility

claim that allergic reactions are dose independent. However, clinical experience shows that patients with proven contact dermatitis to nickel ions may, in certain cases, tolerate nickel-containing
alloys in the mouth. One explanation is the extremely low concentration of Ni caused by the diluting effect of saliva.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does test exposure time matter in conducting biocompatibility tests?

Dose–Response Relationship of Toxicity
Paracelsus (1493−1541), who is sometimes referred to as the
“father of toxicology,” stated, “All things are poison, and nothing is without poison; only the dose permits something not to be
poisonous.” In short, “The dose makes the poison.” The statement
indicates that toxicity is dose dependent; the effect of a specific
dose of a therapeutic substance may be toxic, nontoxic, or beneficial. The quantity of a substance (in milligrams) ingested by test
animals is often expressed as milligrams per kilograms of body
weight (mg/kg bw).
Figure 17-15 shows a typical dose–response curve from a cellculture test (cytotoxicity test), where cell viability, measured as
relative optical density, decreases with an increase in the dose of the
applied chemical (e.g., ZnCl2). Two important concepts evolved
from the dose–response plot. A dose can be described either as a
lethal dose (LD), in which the response is the death of animals or
cells, or an effective dose (ED), in which the response is another
observable outcome. The plot allows us to identify the doses that
affect a percentage of the exposed population. For example, lethal
dose fifty (LD50) is the dose that kills 50% of the test organisms.
The plot also shows that there are doses of a substance that do
not elicit any adverse biological reaction, called the threshold dosage, and the highest nontoxic dose is the so-called no-observedadverse-effect level (NOAEL).
Not all biological reactions to dental materials follow this strict
dose concept. As has been mentioned, allergic reactions can occur
at much lower concentrations than toxic reactions, and they are
rather insensitive to the concentration of allergen. Some even

Test Requirements
The test conditions and the interpretation of the test results
should reflect the nature of body contact and the duration of
that contact (ISO 10993-1). The nature of contact can be a
surface contact, an externally communicating medical device,
or implanted medical devices. Materials may contact an intact
or a breached surface. For instance, removable dentures contact
the mucosal membrane, which mainly is intact, but periodontal
dressings contact breached mucosal surfaces. Dental restorative
materials generally belong to the group of externally communicating devices. This classification obviously reflects the presence
or the lack of a barrier, such as the epithelium or the dentin,
between the material and the target tissue. No such barrier is
present for dental implants.
The duration of contact is grouped into (1) limited (≤24 hours),
(2) prolonged (>24 hours to 30 days), and (3) long term (>30
days) contact (ISO 10993-1). For example, impression materials
are used only for a few minutes, and temporary cements are in
the mouth for up to a few weeks. For short-term exposures, the
risk for allergic reactions is of special concern but not the risks of
chronic toxic or mutagenic effects. In general, the most demanding tests are designed to evaluate materials that are expected to last
for the longest times.
All available biocompatibility tests are so-called “models,”
always representing one specific aspect of biocompatibility, and
as such, a model may not meet all the requirements mentioned

Relative optical density (%)

150

100

50

0
NOAEL

–50
1E-2

1E-1

365

1E0

1E+1

1E+2

LD50

1E+3

1E+4

1E+5

Concentration of ZnCl2 (M)

• Figure 17-15 Typical dose–response curve indicating the biological reaction (cell metabolism, measured
as relative optical density) in relation to the applied dose of Zn2+. Single measurements are shown (in circle)
in combination with a best-fit curve (solid) and 95% confidence interval (dotted lines). The lethal dose fifty
(LD50) is the concentration of Zn2+ that affects 50% of the culture; the no-observed-adverse-effect level
(NOAEL) is the highest concentration that has no effect.

366

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

previously. Therefore a set of tests is necessary for a final evaluation
of the biocompatibility.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Is there one best test to measure biocompatibility?

Types of Biocompatibility Tests
Three types of tests are used to analyze the biocompatibility of
dental materials: (1) in vitro tests, (2) animal tests, and (3) usage
tests performed in experimental animals or humans. Tests can be
performed either with the material or with an extract. Extracts are
prepared by placing a test material with a defined surface into a
liquid (e.g., saline or cell-culture medium) of a given volume for a
defined period of time. The terms eluate and extract are often used
synonymously in the literature.

In Vitro Tests
For in vitro tests, the candidate material or an extract of the material is placed in direct or indirect contact with some biological system outside of an organism in a container (e.g., cell-culture dishes
or test tubes). Indirect contact involves a barrier such as agar, a
membrane filter, or dentin between the test material and the target biological system. The goal of indirect contact is to improve
the relevance of cell-culture tests for certain clinical situations.
For example, a dentin–disk barrier mimics the tooth cavity in a
cell-culture system. Biological systems may consist of mammalian cells, cellular organelles, tissues, bacteria, or certain enzymes.
The main endpoints to be recorded are cytotoxicity, genotoxicity,
and mutagenicity. In vitro tests are relatively fast and inexpensive.
They can easily be standardized and controlled to provide highly
reliable and reproducible measurements.
The in vitro tests, however, lack the ability to closely simulate
the complex interactions that exist in an organism between and
among the immune, inflammatory, and circulatory systems. The
poor correlation between cytotoxicity assays and pulp reactions
for some restorative materials in animal models has been reported.
In conclusion, in vitro tests can be used to check if a substance
eluted from the test material has the general potential to be harmful to cells. In vitro tests for assessing genotoxicity or mutagenicity
are often used to assess the carcinogenic potential of a new material in order to avoid complex and expensive animal experiments.
Animal Tests
Animal tests differ from in vitro tests in that an intact animal
(e.g., cats, ferrets, guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, and rats) is used
rather than cells or tissues of animal or human origin. In some animal tests, the test materials are not applied as intended in dental
patients (e.g., restorative materials are implanted subcutaneously
in rats for evaluation of nonspecific toxic response). For acute or
chronic toxicity tests to determine LD50 values, test materials are
ground and fed to animals. Because oral ingestion in such quantities is not realistic, the relevance of such tests for dental materials is
questioned. Many other animal models are described in the literature for testing certain material properties (e.g., carcinogenicity),
but they are rarely used for testing dental materials, and respective
in vitro methods are used instead.
The advantage of animal tests lies in their ability to permit
intact biological systems to respond to or interact with a candidate
material. The disadvantages of animal tests are their high costs, the
difficulty in controlling confounding factors, and the length of

time that may be required to obtain a measurable response. Also,
animal rights activists and other individuals criticize these tests
because of ethical concerns regarding the use of animals. Finally,
the relevance of animal tests in simulating human responses is
often challenged. In spite of these disadvantages, animal tests are
still relevant for evaluating certain risks of new materials prior
to their clinical use, such as testing the sensitization potential in
guinea pigs.

Usage Test
In this group of tests, materials are applied in the test animal as
they are in the patient (e.g., a class V cavity is prepared in monkey
teeth and filled with the test material). After up to 3 months, the
pulp reaction is evaluated histologically. Such usage tests can also
be performed in humans (e.g., in teeth scheduled for extraction
for orthodontic reasons). The choice of animals for a usage test
usually involves larger animals with an anatomy similar to that of
humans, such as dogs, monkeys, or sheep. The ultimate relevance
of a usage test depends on the extent to which the test simulates
the clinical use of the product.
Human clinical trials may be regarded as the best-known usage
test, but there are limitations. Very often no histology is performed, and from clinical symptoms alone, no evaluation of the
real damage to the pulp after placement of a restorative material
is possible. Furthermore, teeth scheduled for extraction because of
orthodontic reasons are normally obtained from young patients.
These teeth have rather open apices, which may react differently
from the teeth of older patients, which have narrow apical openings and may potentially have previous pulp damage from caries.
Usage tests involving either animals or human subjects have
several disadvantages, including their design complexity, the difficulty in controlling experimental variables, and interpretation
challenges. If humans are used in a clinical trial, approval for the
proposed usage tests must be obtained from an institutional review
board. Such tests usually take a long time, which adds considerably to the typically high cost of using human subjects. Finally,
human usage tests may involve legal and confidentiality issues that
do not occur for animal and in vitro tests.
All test methods just mentioned have advantages and limitations. As cell-culture techniques evolve, animal-based tests are
continuously being replaced by in vitro tests, along with imaging
techniques and research focused on mechanisms that control the
biological responses to materials. Biocompatibility testing in the
future may lead to more reliable predictions of adverse effects, and
this knowledge of biological properties may allow us to formulate materials that provide specific, desired biological responses.
However, one should keep in mind that to date, no test can guarantee that a substance will not cause an adverse effect in individuals exposed to that material in the clinic. Therefore postmarket
surveillance is of utmost importance (see Legal Regulations and
Risk Classes section).
Test Strategy
All test methods discussed previously have obvious pros and cons,
and thus following certain test strategies is advisable. In vitro tests
should initially be performed for cytotoxicity or genotoxicity/mutagenicity evaluation. Assessment is then made if the results from in
vitro tests together with what is known from the literature are sufficient to fulfill the biocompatibility criteria. If not, animal tests such
as allergy tests using guinea pigs are performed. Afterward, a new
assessment is made to determine whether further testing is necessary. The strategy is shown in Figure 17-16. Clinical tests in some

CHAPTER 17

Acceptable risks

Reassessment

Clinical tests

Reassessment

In vivo tests (animal experiments)

Reassessment

In vitro tests (cell cultures)

Risk assessment by an expert

• Figure 17-16 Strategy of biocompatibility testing. Based on a clinical
risk assessment if necessary, in vitro tests are performed. After reevaluation, it will be decided if an animal test is necessary. Then a further reevaluation follows, and so forth. (From Schmalz G, Arenholt-Bindslev D, editors:
Biocompatibility of Dental Materials. Berlin-Heidelberg, 2009, Springer.)

countries are mandatory for materials that are considered to be of
high risk. The final decision for market clearance is then made by
an interchange between manufacturers and a government agency
(e.g., the U.S. Food and Drug Administration [FDA] in the United
States) or a private organization with authority granted by a government agency.

CRITICAL QUESTION
If you were presented with a new material, never before used in a human
being, how would you decide if it was safe for use as a dental restorative
material?

Responsibilities
The manufacturer is responsible and liable for a new material to
meet all requirements regarding biocompatibility (see Legal Regulations and Risk Classes section). When such products are released to
the profession, dentists, dental staff, and patients must assume that
sufficient safety testing has been performed to minimize potential
risks. The question is, how much evidence is sufficient to demonstrate that a product is sufficiently safe for general clinical use? The
consensus of several parties (i.e., manufacturers and government
agencies) is a prerequisite, as discussed later in this chapter. In addition, the clinician also has certain responsibilities in this respect.
First of all, the clinician must strictly follow the instructions
for use with the correct material indications. If the clinician does

Biocompatibility

367

not follow the indication, the manufacturer is no longer liable.
Furthermore, the clinician must apply state-of-the-art techniques;
for instance, insufficient curing of resin materials results in increased
cytotoxicity of the material and impaired mechanical properties.
New risks may arise with materials already on the market (e.g.,
estrogenicity associated with sealants), and the clinician must be
able to critically assess the information provided by the manufacturer or in the scientific literature. The information on biocompatibility provided by the manufacturer may be insufficient because
the detailed composition of the materials is often not declared. If
a patient is allergic to certain monomers or metals, the clinician
needs to know the composition of the material to be used to avoid
an adverse effect. If in doubt, the clinician can contact the company directly to obtain this information.
Manufacturers often make special claims regarding their materials, such as bioactivity. The clinician must be very critical of such
claims, which should only be generated on the basis of neutral
information and basic knowledge. More importantly, one can
search for the most current evidence in the PubMed, Web of Science, or other databases with key words or MeSH terms.
A request should be made to national agencies in the dentist’s
home country to determine whether any adverse-event reports
have been made. As one might expect, unless catastrophic failures
have occurred soon after the product’s introduction, the shorter
the time that the product has been in existence, the smaller the
number of adverse-effects reports that will be found. Furthermore, legal regulations may require that dentists report adverse
reactions they observed with their patients (see Postmarket
Surveillance section).
Finally, the clinician should be well informed about the biocompatibility of dental materials to answer the queries of patients.
Biocompatibility is a current topic for the media, and there is lots
of information available on the Internet, some of which is not
based on scientific evidence. The clinician must be able to provide
correct answers to the patient.

Biocompatibility Testing Standards
Because of the multifactorial nature of biocompatibility and the
large number of different test methods described in the literature,
standardization is essential for the unbiased comparison of results
from different studies, and standards are helpful to fulfill the
legal requirements for biocompatibility. The two ISO standards
relevant to the biocompatibility of devices and materials in dentistry are ISO 10993, Biological Evaluation of Medical Devices;
and ISO 7405:2018, Evaluation of Biocompatibility of Medical
Devices Used in Dentistry.
ISO 10993 consists of more than 20 single standards and
related documents, each addressing a different area of biological testing of medical devices (which includes dental materials). For example, Part 1 describes the general requirements for
biocompatibility testing; Part 3 describes tests for genotoxicity,
carcinogenicity, and reproductive toxicity; Part 5 describes different tests for cytotoxicity; and Part 10 describes tests for irritation and skin sensitization. ISO 7405:2018 describes the tests
that are specific to dental materials. For example, the standard
describes dentistry-specific cytotoxicity tests and all usage tests,
such as the pulp/dentin test, the pulp capping test, the endodontic usage test, and the implant usage test, as well as the dentin–
disk barrier test in a cell-culture system described earlier. Clinical
risk assessment (see Figure 17-16) can be performed as recommended in ISO 14971:2019, Medical Devices—Application of

368

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Risk Management to Medical Devices, where the different steps
for selecting the appropriate tests are delineated.
Standards are regularly reviewed and revised. However, standards also have some disadvantages. Standards may not always
keep pace with the development of new scientific technology. In
addition, standards are developed based on agreements and compromises among manufacturers, academicians, and the dental
profession, which is a time-consuming process. Standards may be
considered arbitrary in nature because certain tests are selected
out of a larger number of methods. However, in spite of these
limitations, standards for biological testing are necessary to ensure
the biological safety of medical and dental products, and they are
generally considered to represent the state of the art in biocompatibility testing.

Safety Data Sheets
Each dental product is supplied with a Safety Data Sheet (SDS),
also known as a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) before 2013
or a product safety data sheet (PSDS). In the United Kingdom, the
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) requires
such information. This is a standardized report on the properties of
a particular product/substance, for example, melting point, boiling
point, and flash point. This report is intended for occupational settings and is essential for users and emergency personnel because this
data sheet describes procedures for handling or working with the
material safely. In addition to physical data, this document identifies
toxicity risks, health effects, first-aid procedures, reactivity, storage
and disposal conditions, and where applicable, procedures for firefighting. Furthermore, SDSs contain information on the types of
protective equipment that should be used and procedures that must
be followed for accidental releases and handling of spills. Limited
information on the composition of the material is also included.

Labeling
Labeling requirements are based on national or international legislation. Besides other obligations, potentially harmful substances
must be properly labeled to minimize the risk of injuries to anyone
who may come in contact with them and the risks of environmental exposure. The United Nations has installed a Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labeling of Chemicals (GHS),
which provides a harmonized basis for labeling. Special pictograms may be placed on the package in addition to so-called Hand P-statements. H-statements are a set of standardized phrases
about the hazards of chemical substances. P-statements are a set
of precautionary statements. Examples of the GHS pictograms are
shown in Figure 17-17.

Legal Regulations and Risk Classes
The Dental Products Panel (DPP) of the FDA Medical Devices
Advisory Committee reviews and evaluates data concerning the
safety and effectiveness of marketed and investigational products
for use in dentistry, endodontics, or bone physiology relative to
the oral and maxillofacial area and makes appropriate recommendations to the Commissioner of Food and Drugs.

Risk Classes
The FDA classifies all medical devices into one of three classes—
Class I, II, or III—according to the risk-based regulatory

controls necessary to provide a reasonable assurance of the safety
and effectiveness of a device. Class I devices generally pose the
lowest risk to the patient/user, and Class III devices pose the
highest risk. Dental devices that are not specifically exempted are
required to be cleared by FDA prior to distribution into interstate commerce.
There are three levels of regulatory controls: general controls,
special controls, and premarket approval (PMA). General controls have the least amount of regulatory control and are used
whenever the level of device risk is low. They apply to all three
classes of devices and include adulteration or misbranding,
device electronic establishment registration and listing, premarket notification, quality systems, medical device reporting,
and labeling. Special controls apply when general controls alone
are insufficient to ensure safety and effectiveness. They apply
to Class II devices and include device guidelines and manuals,
adhering to mandatory performance standards, recommendations or other actions, and special labeling. PMA is necessary
whenever general or special controls cannot provide sufficient
information to ensure medical device safety and effectiveness.
They apply to Class III devices and include clinical investigations, safety and effectiveness data, adverse reactions and complications, patient information, and many more according to
the type of device.
If the manufacturers intend to introduce a device to the U.S.
market that does not require the standard PMA (e.g., Class II
devices), they need to submit a 510(k). The 510(k) is a premarket
submission to FDA to demonstrate that the device is at least as
safe and effective as, that is, substantially equivalent to, a legally
marketed device that is not subject to PMA. Most of the submissions to the Dental Branch are 510(k) types of submissions.
Similar regulatory systems have been established in other parts of
the world. For example, the EU system also uses risk Classes I, II, and
III but subdivides Class II into IIa and IIb. Dental devices are mainly
in Class I or IIa; dental implants are in Class IIb. Class II devices
require the involvement of a “notified body,” and Class III require a
device examination by a “notified body” (comparable to the PMA).

Postmarket Surveillance
Even if all available test methods and required evidence are used
and exercised with due diligence, an adverse reaction may still
occur when a large population is exposed to a new material.
Therefore clinicians are required (in some countries by law) to
report observed adverse reactions to competent authorities. The
FDA receives adverse-event reports on devices as either individual
reports or summary reports. Individual reports include voluntary
reports submitted by health care providers and consumers through
MedWatch (http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/default.htm),
the safety information and adverse-event reporting program of
the FDA. Manufacturers and user facilities submit mandatory
reports.

Side Effect of Various Material Groups
To assess the biocompatibility of a material, it is necessary to know
the composition, the substances released, and the chemical/physical characteristics of both the material and the substances released.
Biocompatibility cannot be predicted by the composition alone.
The material groups of interest include dental amalgam, methacrylate-based resins, dental alloys, dental ceramics, hydrofluoric
acid, GICs, and latex products.

CHAPTER 17

PICTOGRAM

MEANING OF PICTOGRAM

Acute Toxic

TYPE OF HAZARD(S)
(Associated with this pictogram)

The chemical is a risk to
health if used improperly.

• Carcinogen
• Mutagenicity
• Reproductive Toxicity
• Respiratory Sensitizer
• Target Organ Toxicity
• Aspiration Toxicity

The chemical is a serious
health or physical hazard
or poison. It will produce
adverse effects following a
single dose. This pictogram
is usually used in combination
with the Health Hazard Pictogram.

• Acute Toxicity (fatal or
toxic) if inhaled or
swallowed, or if it comes
in contact with the skin.

The chemical may cause
immediate, serious health
effects but it is less severe than
the Severe Toxic pictogram (skull
and crossbones). This pictogram
is usually used in combination with
the Health Hazard Pictogram.

• Irritant (skin and eye)
• Skin Sensitizer
• Acute Toxicity
• Narcotic Effects
• Respiratory Tract Irritant

The chemical may burst into
flame. Be careful to keep away
from ignition sources and
combustible materials.

• Flammables
• Pyrophorics
• Self-Heating
• Emits Flammable Gas
• Self-Reactive
• Organic Peroxides

The chemical is a physical or
health hazard that can easily
damage skin or eyes. Be aware
of PPE and storage requirements.

• Skin Corrosion/Burns
• Eye Damage
• Corrosive to Metals

The chemical may cause other
materials to ignite or burn faster.
It can create an increased fire
risk in work or storage environment.

• Oxidizers

Health Hazard

Severe Toxic

Biocompatibility

Flammable

Corrosive

Oxidizer

Gas Under Pressure

Explosive

This chemical consists of
pressurized gas that would
explode, rocket, or damage
health if heated, ruptured,
or leaking.

• Gases Under Pressure

This material can blow up
or otherwise create an
uncontrolled reaction.
Should be treated with
extreme caution.

• Explosives
• Self-Reactives
• Organic Peroxides

• Figure 17-17 Examples for labeling according to the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and
Labeling of Chemicals (GHS) system. This labeling system, developed for chemicals, is often used for
labeling dental materials.

369

370

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

CRITICAL QUESTION
What evidence or documentation can you provide to dental patients to assure
them that amalgam is a safe material for dental restorations for the general
population?

Dental Amalgam
Although amalgam is an alloy of metals such as Ag, Sn, Cu, or Zn
with Hg, most of the controversy stems from the known toxicity
of mercury and the question of the toxic effects of mercury within
amalgam restorations.

Mercury
Mercury occurs naturally and exists in the environment in three
forms: metallic mercury (Hg⁰), inorganic salts (HgS and HgCl2),
and organic mercury (CH3Hg and C2H5Hg). Microorganisms
and various natural processes can convert metallic mercury to
inorganic compounds, inorganic mercury to organic compounds,
or organic mercury to inorganic compounds. Methylmercury is
the most common organic form that is transformed by natural
processes in the environment and is more toxic than ethyl mercury, metallic mercury, or the inorganic salts. Methylmercury is a
major safety concern because it bioaccumulates through the food
chain, mainly in large fishes such as sharks, swordfish, and tuna,
and enters the human body through fish consumption. Metallic mercury accumulates in the kidneys and the brain. In the
brain, metallic mercury can be converted to inorganic salt with
an increased retention time. The half-life ranges from 13 to 99
days depending on the form, with metallic mercury exhibiting a
longer half-life than inorganic forms. Evidence from primate studies, human case studies, modeling studies, or experimental studies
shows a large variation of data, but the half-life of inorganic mercury in the brain may be years or decades.
Metallic mercury gains access to the body via the skin or as
a vapor inhaled through the lungs. Ingested metallic mercury is
poorly absorbed from the gut (0.01%), which makes inhalation
of mercury vapor the primary portal into the body. Absorption
of ingested inorganic mercury in the gut is 1% to 7%. Excretion may occur through exhaled vapor or through urine, feces,
or skin (sweat). For example, mercury vapor is readily absorbed
after inhalation. Dissolved mercury can be transported through
blood and distributed to the brain and other organs and excreted
by exhalation and in urine. Metallic mercury is transported to
blood cells and tissues, where metallic mercury is oxidized rapidly
to mercuric ions (Hg2+).
Numerous tests for the body burden of mercury have been
developed, including those based on the analysis of blood, urine,
and hair. Of these test parameters, the measurement of mercury
in the urine after 24 hours may be the best long-term indicator
of the total metallic mercury body burden (expressed as μg/L)
or normalized to grams of creatinine in urine (expressed as μg/g
creatinine). Normal levels of creatinine in urine are between
0.6 and 1.1 mg/dL (females) and 0.7 and 1.3 mg/dL (males).
Sampling of metals in hair, nails, feces, bone, and teeth is also
advocated in certain cases as a partial indication of long-term
exposure.
Symptoms of Mercury Poisoning
The nervous system is sensitive to all forms of mercury, although
the brain is most sensitive to metallic mercury and methylmercury. Acute symptoms of mercury poisoning are mainly a result of

spillage of liquid mercury in confined industrial spaces. The first
sign is dyspnea. This may be followed by paroxysmal cough, chest
pain, pulmonary infiltration, chills, nausea, and vomiting. Fatal
outcomes have also occurred.
Chronic exposure levels indicated by a mercury concentration
in urine of 5 μg/g creatinine (or 7 μg/L) are associated with no
risk; concentrations of >20 μg/g creatinine are associated with
increased risk of subtle or unclear symptoms; at 50 μg/g creatinine, subclinical adverse effects of kidney function may occur; and
the level of 100 μg/g creatinine is considered the onset of mercurialism. Symptoms of mercurialism include weakness, fatigue,
anorexia, weight loss, insomnia, irritability, changes in personality,
dizziness, tremors in the extremities or the eyelids, memory loss,
and impairment of vision and hearing. Although amalgams do
not release anywhere near toxic levels of mercury, the long half-life
of mercury in the body raises concerns among some individuals.

Mercury Release From Amalgam and Body Uptake
A low quantity of mercury is released from amalgam restorations
as a result of a passive tarnish layer on the surface. The total
mercury uptake from dental amalgams was estimated to be 1 to
3 μg/day, depending on the number and size of amalgam restorations present, although an uptake as high as 17 μg/day has been
reported. The WHO limit for the provisional tolerable weekly
intake (PTWI) value is 5 μg/kg bw or 50 μg/day for a 70-kg
person. The main source of mercury uptake from amalgam fillings is inhaled mercury vapor. Methylmercury is not released
from amalgams but is generally a product of bacteria or other
biological systems acting on metallic mercury, mainly in the
environment and taken up by humans through fish consumption. The conversion of inorganic mercury into methylmercury
inside the human body generally does not take place or only
in minor amounts. The total uptake of mercury from amalgam
fillings is reflected in an increased blood/urine level of mercury.
An increase of 1 to 1.8 μg/L of mercury in urine for each 10
restored amalgam surfaces is estimated, with more recent data
demonstrating lower values.
Levels of 1 to 5 μg/L in urine were described as the normal
range for nonoccupational groups. A 2013 study by Nicolae et
al. reported that 5418 Canadians, aged between 6 and 79 years,
with amalgam restorations of up to 65 surfaces per individual
showed that the mean urine mercury concentrations for 98% of
the group were below the levels associated with any health risks.
One study estimated the uptake of food-related organic mercury
to be approximately six times greater than the uptake of mercury
from amalgam restorations. A large survey of the U.S. population
published in 2016 confirmed that the inorganic mercury concentration in the blood increases with the number of amalgam
restoration surfaces. However, the level was well below the safety
threshold established by the WHO and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The mercury burden of dental personnel is usually higher than
for patients because of the application or removal of amalgam
fillings but has decreased in recent years, probably as a result of
improved handling techniques with amalgam, such as the use of
amalgam capsules.
Clinical Symptoms After Amalgam Application
Most claims for adverse reactions to amalgam have been related
to systemic effects. A main concern was directed toward the problem of neurological effects of mercury from amalgam fillings in
children.

CHAPTER 17

Systemic Reactions

Two extensive studies, the Casa Pia study of Portugal led by
Dr. Timothy DeRouen and the New England study of the United
States led by Dr. David Bellinger, were performed in parallel and
reported in 2006. Each study included more than 500 children
divided into two groups; one group received amalgam, and the
other group received resin composite fillings. After 5 years, the
level of mercury in urine in the children was larger with the amalgam group than that in the resin composite group in both studies.
However, no neurological effects could be observed with either
group in both studies. Later, the data/material of the studies was
used for further biochemical analyses or genetic testing, and new
groups of the children were formed. However, the results had been
inconsistent, and such “post hoc” analyses (regrouping of existing
data sets) are regarded as precarious because of possible bias.
The literature on the possible adverse effects of mercury from
amalgam is very extensive. The Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR), a scientific
commission of the EU, published a review in 2015 of recent existing literature, which concluded that the current evidence does not
preclude the use of amalgam for the general population. However, the choice of material should be based on the medical history of the patient, such as allergies or severe renal diseases, which
impair the renal excretion of mercury. In summary, there are no
data to show that mercury released from dental amalgam is harmful to the general population. The observation has been confirmed
by a 2020 literature survey from the International Association for
Dental Research (IADR) Science Information Committee.
Nevertheless, a small number of patients claim that their complaints/symptoms are derived from their amalgam fillings. Several
studies have investigated if claimed symptoms had disappeared after
the removal of amalgam. Nerdrum et al. (2004) could not find any
significant improvement of the symptoms after 7 years, but a questionnaire-based study by Kristoffersen et al. (2016) revealed some
improvement. Melchart et al. (2008) reported that implementing
a health-promotion program aimed at developing health-related
lifestyle management skills had a similar effect as amalgam removal
on the reduction of subjective complaints. The study also reported
a significant reduction of the inorganic mercury concentration in
the blood and urine for the amalgam-removal group.
Local Reactions

Lichenoid reactions have been associated with contact allergy to
mercury from amalgam restorations and possibly mechanical irritation by the restoration. Their appearance can be whitish plaque-like

Biocompatibility

371

or even with erosive parts. In the presence of such a reaction, the
amalgam restoration should be corrected to remove the mechanical irritant or replaced with a mercury-free material. A study of
patients with oral lichenoid contact reactions and positive patch-test
reactions to mercury compounds showed that partial or complete
replacement of amalgam fillings led to a significant improvement in
nearly all patients. In very rare cases, a carcinoma may develop following a localized lichenoid reaction. These patients should be monitored regularly and referred to a specialist if the reaction persists.
Amalgam debris can be trapped in the mucosal connective
tissue during placement or removal of amalgam restorations
through mucosal abrasions, lacerations, or compaction into the
gingival sulcus. Amalgam may enter the socket or periosteum
during tooth extraction or be left within the surgical site of an
endodontic retrofill procedure. Over time, the debris corrodes
and causes discoloration of the mucosa, known as an amalgam
tattoo (Figure 17-18). Implanted amalgam does not normally
cause acute tissue reactions and is normally totally asymptomatic.
Therefore these fragments of amalgam generally do not need to be
removed except for diagnostic reasons.
Allergic Reactions

Allergic reactions have been described, mainly related to mercury
but less to amalgam. If a patch test of mercury is positive, no new
amalgam restoration should be placed. Existing amalgam restorations should be replaced, if clinical symptoms are present.

FDA Recommendations
Recently, FDA has issued new recommendations for the use of dental amalgam (https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/dental-devices
/dental-amalgam-fillings). Briefly, FDA states that the majority of
evidence suggests exposure to mercury from dental amalgam does
not lead to negative health effects in the general population. Exposure to mercury may pose a greater health risk in certain groups of
people, who may be more susceptible to potential adverse effects
generally associated with mercury. These high-risk populations
include:
• Pregnant women and their developing fetuses
• Women who are planning to become pregnant
• Nursing women and their newborns and infants
• Children, especially those younger than six years of age
• People with pre-existing neurological disease
• People with impaired kidney function
• People with known heightened sensitivity (allergy) to mercury
or other components of dental amalgam

• Figure 17-18 Large blue-colored areas, typically referred to as an amalgam tattoo, which is a benign
area of discolored mucous membrane in the mouth. These examples are not associated with allergic reactions to mercury or any other metallic elements in the amalgam fillings. The discoloration is caused by
small amalgam granules that have fallen into open wounds created during the condensation and carving
of amalgam fillings in prepared teeth (A and B) or retrograde fillings in root apices (C). (Upper two photos,
Courtesy Dr. Hyun-Ju Chung.)

372

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

The FDA strongly encourages that alternative, non-mercury
materials such as resin composites or glass ionomer cements be
used when possible and appropriate. In addition, The FDA does
not recommend anyone remove or replace existing amalgam fillings in good condition unless it is considered medically necessary
by a health care professional.

Environment
In 2013, the Minamata Convention was signed and ratified
by more than 120 countries, where participating countries are
legally bound to reduce the mercury burden to the environment.
Although the relative contribution of dental amalgam to environmental mercury exposure compared with fossil fuel combustion
or small business gold mining is very low, a phase-down of dental
amalgam use was agreed upon. A number of provisions for such
a phase-down have been listed in the Minamata Convention of
2013; provisions include improved caries prevention, the use of
amalgam capsules, the installation of amalgam separators, and the
research/development of new alternative materials. The clinician
should check with the local authorities for the respective legal
regulations to follow with regard to amalgam waste disposal.
Handling of Mercury in the Dental Office
Because of the potential health risks for dental personnel exposed
to mercury from handling amalgam, special care must be exercised
when using dental amalgam. In 2003 the ADA issued detailed recommendations that ensure safe handling of amalgam and amalgam waste. For more details, see Chapter 8, Mercury Hygiene in
Dental Offices.

Methacrylates and Resin Composites
There is ample evidence that dental adhesives and resin materials
release free monomers into biological environments over extended
periods of time. Additionally, catalysts, accelerators, other additives, components within filler particles, and nanoparticles can
be liberated. The amount of released substances depends on the
degree of polymerization. Undercuring leads to an increased
amount of released substances and increased cytotoxicity. Monomers have been shown to evaporate during procedures in the dental offices or processing in the dental laboratory. The measured
monomer concentrations in the dental office are well below limit
values but greater in the dental laboratories despite mandatory
specific safety precautions. Although noticeable nanoparticles are
released during grinding, polishing, or restoration removal, the
amount of released particles is low, and no health risk for the dental personnel and the patient can be assumed. The main interest
of this section is directed to the monomers that include bis-GMA
and related molecules, urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA), TEGDMA, HEMA, or bisphenol A dimethacrylate (bis-DMA). Polyacid modified resin composites (“compomers”) have a similar
composition as resin composites, and they can be assumed to have
the same biological properties.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why can resin composites be used although bisphenol A is released?

Systemic Reactions
Presently, the most intensively discussed systemic effect of resin
materials is the (claimed) estrogenicity of bisphenol A (BPA) released
from dental resin materials. The evidence of BPA estrogenicity is

derived from molecular modeling studies and in vitro studies of
estrogen receptor–BPA binding. These studies also show that BPA
is probably 1000-fold less potent than the native estrogen hormone. Nonetheless, a number of diseases have been claimed to be
associated with BPA exposure from many environmental sources,
such as food can linings or polycarbonate plastics.
BPA is a precursor of bis-GMA, bis-DMA, and similar aromatic
monomers, which are used in resin composites. BPA can exist as
an impurity in both monomers. Bis-GMA under physiological
hydrolytic conditions does not degrade into BPA, but bis-DMA
does. BPA is released from resin composites made of bis-GMA
or related monomers over time as a result of the aforementioned
impurities and from bis-DMA materials, also as a result of degradation. However, the total release is very low and several orders of
magnitude below the presently accepted toxicological limit value
for systemic exposure of 4 μg/kg bw.
In vitro studies by Schweikl et al. (2006) showed that monomers such as HEMA or TEGDMA are genotoxic and mutagenic.
These effects could be related to an intracellular increase of ROS,
which occurred after GSH depletion resulting from monomer
detoxification. As a result of a functioning p-53 protein, DNA
damage was either repaired or the cells were transferred to apoptosis. Thus no tumor formation has been reported as a result of
resin composites.
As discussed before, nanoparticles are generated during grinding, polishing, or removal of resin composites restorations, but
the quantity is so small that no risk can be assumed for the dental
personnel and the patients. Nonetheless, the FDI issued recommendations in 2018 for dental personnel to further reduce the
risk. They should use ample water spray during procedures whenever possible, wear a surgical mask, and sculpt restorations to neardesired form before light curing, thus reducing dust generation.

Local Reactions
Pulp Reactions

Postoperative discomfort/sensitivity or pain shortly after the placement of resin composite restorations has often been attributed to
fluid movement in the dentinal tubules but not to toxicity, even
though resins before polymerization are known to be cytotoxic
in vitro and leachable components traverse dentin. However, no
toxic reaction of the dental pulp is observed histologically if the
remaining dentin thickness is well above 0.5 mm. For deep cavity
preparations, the observations are inconsistent, with some reporting no pulp reaction, mainly in animal experiments, and others
reporting such reactions.
In a direct pulp capping situation, pulpal inflammation with or
without a dentin bridge (reparative dentin) has been described in
patients. Interestingly, some studies using monkey models showed
that resin materials did not cause an inflammation, and dentin
bridging occurred. On the other hand, Bergenholtz, in 2000,
reported an association of pulpal inflammation under resin composite restorations with the presence of bacteria at the cavity floor.
The clinical consequences are that in flat or medium cavities, the
meticulous use of adhesive technique is most important in order
to avoid any bacteria at the cavity floor, and there is no risk of
chemical pulp damage by the resin materials. Incorporating an
antibacterial monomer in the adhesive resin has been reported.
However, in deep cavities with the potential for pulp exposure, a
base (e.g., a tricalcium silicate cement) should be applied at the
cavity floor close to the pulp.
The use of high-irradiance light-curing units (LCUs) may also
lead to pulp damage in deep cavities. LCUs with no more than

CHAPTER 17

2000 mW/cm² and exposure times of up to 20 sec are generally
used in dental practice. If LCUs with >2000 mW/cm² even with
shorter exposure times are recommended, the manufacturer must
provide sound scientific evidence of no tissue damage.
Gingival Reactions

Gingivitis close to resin-based composite fillings is mainly related
to the property of resin materials facilitating biofilm formation.
The acidic monomers in adhesives may cause a chemical burn on
the gingiva, which heals within a few days. Denture stomatitis
may appear as small reddish areas (Figure 17-10, A) on the mucosa
covered by an acrylic-based appliance. Undercuring results in an
increased release of cytotoxic monomers, with possible toxic effects
on the adjacent gingiva in deep approximal cavities. An LCU with
a very high irradiance may lead to local burns of the lips and the
tongue, and a rubber dam provides no protection.

Allergic Reactions
Nearly 2% of dental personnel have been described to be allergic to
resin-based adhesives/composites because of frequent exposure to
nonpolymerized materials. The allergenicity of methacrylate-based
materials such as HEMA or TEGDMA is well documented, and
the use of gloves is not effective in preventing contact because most
monomers diffuse easily through gloves, especially when diluted
with organic solvents, as in many dental adhesives. One study
showed that the best substance for screening allergies to methacrylate-based products is HEMA, which confirmed 96.7% of the dental patients with a suspected methacrylate allergy and 100% of the
dental personnel with clinical symptoms of a methacrylate allergy.
The allergic reactions occur primarily as contact dermatitis,
with the resins acting as haptens via delayed hypersensitivity (type
IV) mechanisms. In rare cases, anaphylactic responses have been
reported, with asthmatic symptoms, severe urticaria, and skin
rashes and swellings on the entire body, followed by the formation
of blisters on the child’s face, ears, and lips. In rare cases, allergic rhinitis or other reactions of the respiratory tract have been described.
Cross-reactivity between different monomers has been observed.

Dental Alloys
As discussed in Chapter 9, Alloy Classification by Principal Elements, dental alloys usually contain multiple elements and are
commonly described by their major components. The microstructure of alloys may be classified as single phase (solid solution) or
multiple phases depending on the difference in the atomic structure between elements (Chapter 2, Equilibrium-Phase Diagrams).
The composition and the phase structure significantly influence the
release of substances in the oral environment. This section will discuss the release mechanism and biological effects of alloys and the
allergy reactions of some common elements used in dental alloys.

Biocompatibility

373

Normally, dental alloys can release sufficient metal ions to cause
adverse effects in some cases but not enough to alter the esthetic
appearance or cause failure of the prostheses.
Several statements can be made about the release of elements
from dental casting alloys. First, multiphase structures often
increase the elemental release from alloys. Second, certain elements have an inherently higher tendency to be released from
dental alloys, regardless of alloy composition. In other words, the
release of metal ions from the alloys is not necessarily proportional
to the nominal alloy composition. Third, microscopic particles
can be abraded from metallic restorations during wear processes
that accelerate the corrosion processes in vivo because of the loss
of the passivation layer. Fourth, certain environmental conditions
around the alloy, such as a decline in pH under a biofilm, will
affect the release of elements. For in vitro studies, the chemical
composition and characteristics of the cell-culture medium, pH,
ion composition, and serum are significant variables that dictate
the environment. For in vivo conditions, the biological factors
that may contribute to alloy corrosion include the biofilm, organic
acids, types of enzymes produced by oral microorganisms or those
present in food, and phagocytotic cells such as human neutrophils. There are also interaction factors between alloys and the
patient, such as the consumption frequency of acidic foods and
beverages and the composition of saliva.
On the basis of these studies, the release of metal ions cannot
be clearly predicted from the nobility or the overall composition
of cast alloys. Each product must be evaluated individually for its
corrosion behavior and the release of metal ions in specific corrosive environments.

Systemic Reactions
Genotoxic effects have been reported for beryllium and gallium salts. Alteration of DNA repair processes and carcinogenic
effects have been reported for Cd2+, Ni2+, and Co2+. There is some
evidence suggesting that nickel, cobalt, and chromium tend to
increase cancer risk in humans. Beryllium is a documented carcinogen. Although the release of beryllium from alloys containing
beryllium and of Ni2+ and Co2+ from respective alloys has been
documented intraorally and in vitro, there are no studies showing
that these dental alloys cause cancer in patients.
Inhaling metallic dusts from grinding or polishing berylliumcontaining alloys, or fumes such as those encountered in casting
beryllium-containing alloys, can cause berylliosis in individuals
with a hypersensitivity to beryllium. The occupational data indicate that beryllium may increase the risk of lung cancer and other
tumors in humans, especially for those working at beryllium-processing facilities. Thus dental lab technicians would presumably
be at the highest risk of adverse effects from exposure to beryllium
dust and vapors. The use of personal protection equipment (PPE)
is necessary when metallic dusts in the dental laboratory arise during handling.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the corrosion of metals contribute to their biocompatibility?

Metal Ions Released From Alloys
Dental casting alloys are made corrosion resistant through the use
of noble metals (e.g., high-noble and noble alloys) or the use of
chromium and titanium to form a protective passivation layer on
base-metal and titanium alloys (Chapter 9, Predominantly BaseMetal Alloys). However, some elements in the alloy lose electrons and become cations as they are released in the oral cavity.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Which risks are associated with the handling of base-metal alloys? Which
dental personnel are most likely to exhibit adverse effects to base-metal
alloys?

Local Reactions
Figure 17-19 shows the concentrations of a series of metal ions
that, in a cell-culture test, elicited 50% cell death (TC50). The
graph shows that various metal ions differ markedly in their

374

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

3500
3000
TC50 (M)

2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

5

7

10

11

21

33

Ag Zn Cd Hg Au Pt Co Cu Ni Pd Mn Nb Mo Ga Cr In Sn
• Figure 17-19 Cytotoxicity of different metal cations, expressed as the concentration that will kill 50% of
the cells in culture (TC50). Various metal cations elicit a large array of different cytotoxic reactions.

intrinsic (substance-specific) toxicity. In the in vivo situation,
the amount of released metal ions together with their intrinsic
toxicity will determine the biological effect. Copper or zinc has
been added to the metal in metal-ceramic as an oxide former
(Chapter 10, Requirements of Metal Component), which migrates
to the surface and oxidizes during preparation of the metal prior to
ceramic firing. These oxides on the surface release comparatively
large amounts of copper and zinc if they are not covered with
ceramic. The consequence would be gingivitis in patients observed
next to crowns, such as that seen in Figure 17-11. Therefore the
oxide layer on the alloys that is not covered by the ceramic must
be removed.
The toxic potential of a high-gold alloy, two low-gold alloys,
a high-palladium alloy, two Pd-Ag alloys, one Ni-Cr alloy, two
Co-Cr alloys, and a 22k-gold alloy was tested by subcutaneous
implantation in rats. The strongest responses were from the Ni-Cr
alloy, and the weakest response was from the 22k-gold alloy. The
high-gold alloy and the high-palladium alloy showed reactions
similar to that of the 22k-gold alloy. However, the low-gold alloy
and the Pd-Ag alloys ranked between the base-metal alloy and
the high-gold alloys. This study and many other studies showed
that the metallic ions released are responsible for much of the
interaction behavior of dental alloys. However, no general prediction concerning the corrosion behavior and the biocompatibility
based on the composition of the alloy alone is possible. However,
severely cytotoxic alloys generally contain more nickel than those
of biocompatible products.

Allergic Reactions
In a 2009 study, 206 patients underwent patch tests with the
European baseline series because of a suspected contact allergy to
dental alloys. Twenty-eight patients had positive reactions. The
majority of positive reactions occurred for gold sodium thiosulfate, palladium chloride, and nickel sulfate, followed by amalgam,
ammoniated mercury, and cobalt chloride, and then amalgam
alloys and ammonium tetrachloroplatinate. Only 14 patients had
a clinically relevant contact allergy on the oral mucosa (7 with oral
lichen planus and 7 with stomatitis). The conclusions of the study
were that contact allergies to dental alloys are infrequent.
Another study revealed that allergies to alloys in some patients
were manifested not only by lichenoid contact lesions and contact

dermatitis responses but also pustulosis palmaris et plantaris,
which may occur on the hands, the feet, or the entire body. Patch
testing of 167 females and 45 males indicated that 148 (69.8%)
patients had one or more positive reactions toward alloy components. The most common allergens were nickel, palladium,
chromium, cobalt, and tin. A study of 60 persons documented
that nickel has the highest allergenic frequency, followed by chromium, cobalt, silver, copper, palladium, platinum, and gold. A
study suggested that dental patients could even be regarded as a
risk group for metal allergies.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What should the clinician be aware of when using nickel-containing alloys?

Nickel Allergy

Nickel is a potent allergenic metal, with an incidence of allergic
reactions between 10% and 20%. Reactions to nickel are more
common among women, presumably because of the chronic
exposure to nickel through jewelry, although the incidence among
men is increasing. These reactions are probably underreported
because they are often subtle and can resemble periodontal inflammation (Figure 17-8, B) or the erythema that results from excessive pressure on the palatal mucosa by metal frameworks. Not all
individuals with nickel allergy will react to intraoral nickel, and
it is currently impossible to predict which individuals will react.
Because the frequency of nickel allergy is high, it is possible that
individuals will become sensitized to nickel after the placement of
nickel-containing alloys in the mouth.
The mechanisms of the high allergy frequency to nickel are not
known, but there is probably a genetic component. In addition,
the tendency of nickel-containing alloys to release relatively large
amounts of nickel ions probably contributes to their allergenicity.
This release is particularly high in acidic conditions, especially for
Ni-Cr alloys with less than 20 wt% of chromium.
On the other hand, one study investigated 700 Finnish adolescents, 417 girls and 283 boys from 14 to 18 years of age, of
which 476 (68%) had a history of orthodontic treatment with
metallic appliances. The majority (91%) of the girls had pierced
ears. Orthodontic treatment was equally common (67% to 70%)
in the boys and the girls. The study consisted of patch testing

CHAPTER 17

with palladium chloride and nickel sulfate, and a patient history
obtained by a questionnaire and from patient records. The girls
had a much higher frequency of allergic patch test reactions to
nickel sulfate. The results suggest that orthodontic treatment does
not seem to increase the risk for nickel hypersensitivity. Rather,
the data suggest that treatment with nickel-containing metallic
orthodontic appliances before sensitization to nickel (ear piercing) may have reduced the frequency of nickel hypersensitivity.
This has been confirmed by other studies. The results of palladium
chloride patch test are discussed in Ni-Pd Cross-Reactivity section.
Palladium Allergy

Metals of the platinum group exhibit a considerable allergenic
potency. Palladium-based alloys have been associated with
stomatitis and oral localized lichenoid reactions, and palladium
allergy seems to occur mainly in patients who have also been
sensitized to nickel. However, Wataha and Hanks concluded in
1996 that palladium-containing alloys do not generally pose an
increased risk to the health of patients because of the limited dissolution rate of palladium from certain palladium alloys. However,
one should note that the palladium in cast metals may react differently in single-phase compared with multiphase dental alloys,
which tend to be less corrosion resistant. The corrosion products
of these multiphase alloys may affect the allergenicity and the
cytotoxicity of palladium-based alloys differently compared with
single-phase alloys.
Ni-Pd Cross-Reactivity

Of the 700 Finnish adolescents discussed earlier in the Nickel
Allergy section, 44 girls were palladium-chloride-positive, whereas
only 4 boys had a reaction to palladium chloride. Of the 48 adolescents who tested positive to palladium chloride, 45 also had an
allergic patch-test reaction to nickel sulfate. The results support
the concept of cross-reactivity between nickel sulfate and palladium chloride. The co-reactivity of nickel and cobalt has also been
reported.
In a 2018 study by Mittermüller et al. involving 500 patients
(406 females and 94 males) with complaints concerning dental
materials, 70 patients (14%) showed a verified allergy with clinical
symptoms and a positive patch test to an intraoral alloy component. Out of the 500 patients, 234 (47%) had positive patch-test
reactions to at least one of the tested possible allergens, with nickel
(19.2%) and palladium (12.6%) being the most frequent allergens
among these patients. Cross-reactivity to Ni and Pd was found in
39 patients, whereas positive reactions to Ni alone was seen in 57
patients and to Pd alone in 24 patients.
Titanium and Titanium Alloys

Studies have revealed that a surface layer of titanium oxide (mostly
TiO2 with small content of Ti2O3 and TiO) has the ability to coexist with living tissues and organisms. Based on these studies, one
can conclude that titanium is relatively nontoxic and noninjurious.
Recently, allergic reactions were claimed to be one of the causes of
peri-implantitis. Limited clinical evidence shows that this might
be true for very few cases. However, no standard patch test for
titanium has yet been established. Another study links titanium
nanoparticles to nonallergic peri-implantitis, and indeed, a comparatively high amount of such particles has been found around
titanium implants. Ti nanoparticles are hypothesized to be phagocytized by macrophages that are present in the peri-implant tissues as a result of existing biofilm-induced inflammation. Because

Biocompatibility

375

macrophages cannot metabolize Ti particles, they secrete inflammatory mediators to attract more macrophages, thus enhancing
the inflammation. However, the scientific evidence for such a scenario is limited.
Other Metals

Cobalt is another metal that, as a component of dental alloys,
has been found to elicit allergic reactions in sensitized patients.
Also, allergies to gold-based dental restorations have been more
commonly reported. In the presence of gold alloy restorations
the prevalence of gold sensitivity was significantly increased. The
patch tests for gold sensitivity of a group of asymptomatic patients
showed that 24 of 71 (33.8%) patients with dental gold appliances had a positive reaction to gold versus 7 of 65 (10.8%) of the
patients with nongold appliances.
Symptoms of Metal Allergic Reactions

A review of 139 published cases of allergic reactions to dental
metallic restorations showed that 99 patients suffered from local
irritations in the form of gingivitis and stomatitis. Only 33 of
139 patients revealed general or remote extraoral reactions. When
the restorations were removed, 82.7% of the patients recovered
from the allergic reactions. Analysis of these data demonstrates
that local allergic reactions to metals may often be underdiagnosed
as inflammatory reactions. Interestingly, after intraoral application of alloys, both perioral (nickel allergy) and extraoral (cobalt
allergy) skin reactions have been observed. In other studies, localized lichenoid reactions, swelling, and pain in oral soft tissues and
lips have been reported. In several patients, gold ions caused an
allergic contact gingivostomatitis, which was similar in appearance to erosive lichen planus. Many of these patients had a history
of reactions to gold jewelry.
Immunotoxicity of Metals

The induction of immune mediators by metallic materials has been
investigated using lymphocyte cell lines. Expressions of the inflammatory mediator interleukin 2 (IL-2) and the immune effector
IgG by T and B cells were found after incubation with three copper-based casting alloys. The production of these immune mediators was altered by released cations. LPS-stimulated osteoblast-like
cells increased the formation of interleukin 1 alpha (IL-1α) and
TNF-α after the cells were incubated with cobalt, chromium, and
titanium. This study showed that metal ions disrupted cytokine
release, osteoblast function, and the synthesis of type I collagen.
Cytokines can be released from unstimulated and stimulated
peripheral blood mononuclear cells after incubation with chromium ions. In addition, chromium cations can reduce cell viability, DNA synthesis, secretion of IL-6, and expression of soluble
IL-2 receptor. These results suggest that chromium may suppress
the immune system.
Several metal ions (Ag, Au, Cu, Hg, Ni, Pd, Pt, and Zn) have
induced the secretion of proteins from macrophages. Subtoxic
concentrations of a nickel solution also induced an increase of
IL-1α and TNF-α secretion from unstimulated and LPS-stimulated THP-1 monocytes/macrophages. There is evidence that
metallic components derived from cast dental prostheses can
modulate the expression of various immunological factors. An
increased expression of cytokines after LPS stimulation by various cell types indicates that bacterial toxins and cations released
by corrosion may collectively cause inflammatory effects related
to oral mucositis, gingivitis, periodontitis, and alveolar bone
resorption.

376

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Dental Ceramics
The oxides and related compounds in dental ceramics exhibit low
dissolution in normal oral fluids and beverages. However, highly
acidic or basic environments can increase the release rates of certain
metal and silicon ions. For example, acidulated phosphate fluoride
(APF) is known to corrode the surfaces of veneering porcelains
and glaze and stain ceramics. This suggests that APF should not be
used in patients who have ceramic or metal-ceramic restorations.

Adverse Reactions
Several investigators have demonstrated that unlike other dental
materials, most dental ceramics do not induce an adverse effect
when they contact the oral mucous membrane. Others have
shown that glazed ceramics, which have been used in implant
trials, caused very mild inflammatory reactions. These glazed
ceramics were less irritating than resin composite or gold. One
can conclude that minor observed irritations may be attributed
to mechanical irritation (e.g., from roughened surfaces). Dental
ceramics have successfully been used in patients with lichenoid
reaction to replace the originally contacting material. Generally,
polished or glazed dental ceramics accumulate significantly less
biofilms on their surfaces than most other restorative materials.
Radioactivity of Dental Ceramics
Naturally occurring radioactivity has been detected in certain dental ceramics. No adverse effects that are caused by exposure to
radiation from dental ceramics have been documented in the literature. A study reported that the beta-dose rates from natural radionuclides in feldspathic porcelains and glass ceramics were about
10 times higher than that of the background, whereas resin composites, alumina-based ceramics, and natural teeth exhibited negligible beta-dose rates. Concentration activities determined from
gamma-spectrometry ranged from 2.01 to 2.9 Bq/g (becquerel per
gram) 40K. However, these activities are below the threshold limit
of 10 Bq/g for 40K. The specific activities of uranium and thorium
were significantly lower than the levels reported in earlier periods when the addition of uranium to dental porcelain materials
was used to enhance fluorescence. These results confirmed that
patients with veneering ceramics and certain glass ceramics are
subjected to higher dose levels (although well within safety limits)
compared with the general population.

eye damage. A significant concern regarding the use and possible
exposure of tissue to low concentrations of HF for dental applications is that the pain or burning sensations may not be experienced
until several hours after exposure. Because of this delayed effect of
HF to produce severe tissue damage, possibly without pain, all tissues that have been exposed to HF should receive immediate firstaid care, medical evaluation, and follow-up evaluations even if the
injury appears insignificant and no pain is experienced.

Inhalation of HF Fume and Ventilation
Inhaling HF fume can damage the lungs. Delayed effects may not
be apparent for hours after the initial exposure. The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set a limit
for exposure to individuals for airborne concentrations to an average of 3 ppm HF over an 8-hour workday. To minimize inhalation of HF fume, gels and liquids should be used with adequate
ventilation (e.g., fume hood).
Emergency Treatment
When eyes have been exposed to HF, they should immediately be
irrigated at an eyewash station for at least 15 minutes with large
volumes of water while the eyelids are held apart and away from
the eyeballs. In all cases when the eyes have been exposed to acids,
immediate medical attention should be sought.
If small areas of the hand or forearm have been contaminated,
these areas must be immediately and thoroughly washed. If calcium gluconate gel is readily available, rinsing should be limited to
5 minutes so that application of the gel can be quickly initiated in
order to limit the migration of fluorine ions. The calcium gluconate gel should be reapplied to the affected areas every 15 minutes.
If calcium gluconate gel is not available, the affected areas should
be rinsed for at least 15 minutes. Contaminated clothing must
be removed and placed in a hood or plastic bag. Prompt medical
attention should be sought in all instances of skin exposure to HF.
Calcium gluconate gel is available as a commercial product and
is a topical antidote for HF residue on exposed skin. The gel combines with HF to form insoluble calcium fluoride, thereby preventing the extraction of calcium from tissues and bones. Calcium
gluconate has a limited shelf life and should be refrigerated and
replaced with a fresh supply after expiration. Disposable gloves
should be used for applying calcium gluconate gel to the skin.

Glass-Ionomer Cements
Hydrofluoric Acid
Etching of the glass phase of dental ceramics with 5% to 9%
buffered hydrofluoric acid (HF) promotes bonding of resin
composites to etched ceramics. HF formulated for dental usage
is significantly more hazardous than other acids used in dental
labs and in the mouth. Technicians and dentists should be well
informed of the risks and the methods for dealing with accidental
HF exposures.
Several fluorine-containing chemicals used in dentistry—such
as ammonium fluoride, ammonium bifluoride, and sodium fluoride—may react with acid or water to produce HF. One should
review the SDSs of all fluoride compounds to learn the safety precautions that are recommended to reduce the risk of HF exposure.

Exposure of Skin, Mucosa, and Eyes
Concentrated HF (≥50%) is extremely corrosive and destroys skin
or soft tissues upon contact and causes systemic fluoride poisoning.
Exposure of the eyes to HF may result in blindness or permanent

Composition and Release of Substances
GICs (polyalkenoate cements) are acid-based cements that are mixed
from a powder of finely ground glass (containing, e.g., calcium and
sodium fluorophosphoaluminosilicate) and a liquid of polyacrylic
acid (Chapter 7, Glass Ionomer Cement). Resin-modified glass-ionomer cements (RMGIs) are a heterogeneous group of materials that
also contain water-soluble polymerizable monomers, such as HEMA
and polyacrylic acid–modified methacrylate, and special catalysts.
RMGIs polymerize by light activation. Glass ionomers release fluoride mainly after setting as an early burst, then decreasing asymptotically over time. Also, aluminum is liberated, and silver is liberated
from silver-containing products. RMGIs release substantial amounts
of monomers and catalysts.
Adverse Reactions of Conventional Glass-Ionomer Cements

No data have been published indicating any systemic toxic
reaction after using conventional GICs in dental practice. These
materials are nongenotoxic and nonmutagenic.

CHAPTER 17

The Council on Dental Materials, Instruments and Equipment
of the ADA reported in 1984 on severe pain after using GICs as
luting agents, which made the removal of GIC-cemented restorations necessary. Possible causes include incorrect handling, such as
pronounced drying of the prepared tooth prior to cementation;
excessive pressure during cementation; or an insufficient thickness
of remaining dentin. Since the implementation of the revised protocol, there have been no such reports published.
Nonset conventional GICs are cytotoxic, whereas set specimens
are not or are only slightly cytotoxic. This parallels observations
that these materials did not cause any pulp damage in medium
or even in deep cavities in human teeth and those from experimental animals when used as restorative materials. Pulp reactions
were only present when bacteria entered the cavity floor under
the restoration. However, if placed directly on the exposed pulp,
conventional GICs elicited severe pulp inflammation. This was
probably attributable to the fact that conventional GICs do not
completely set in contact with a wet surface. Therefore these materials should not be used for direct pulp capping. Conventional
GICs do not cause any gingival or mucosal reaction, and they do
not elicit allergies.

Adverse Reactions to RMGIs
As a result of the resin components (hydrophilic monomers), some
RMGIs were reported to be genotoxic in vitro, although there are
no reports on tumor formation caused by RMGIs. Some products
are severely cytotoxic, even after the setting. In medium cavities of
human teeth and in experimental animals, no pulp reaction was
observed. In deep cavities, the data are inconsistent and depend
on the individual product. In a study in human teeth, one RMGI
showed pulp damage after the application of an RMGI. Therefore
in deep cavities, a protective liner (e.g., calcium silicate cement)
should be applied, and RMGIs should not be used for direct pulp
capping. Recently, another RMGI product was tested in human
teeth, which did not cause postoperative sensitivity or persistent
pulp damage when applied as a liner in very deep cavities. This
heterogeneity in the biocompatibility of different RMGI products
emphasizes the need for the clinician to be familiar with the current scientific literature. Finally, because of the release of hydrophilic monomers like HEMA or TEGDMA, RMGIs may elicit
allergic reactions in sensitized persons.

Natural Rubber Latex
Of particular interest in dentistry is the use of latex gloves and
latex rubber dams, which expose both patients and dental personnel to this potential allergen.

Composition and Release of Substances
Natural latex products are made from a milky-white sap harvested
from a rubber tree grown in tropical regions. Ammonia, which
is added to the sap as a preservative, hydrolyzes and degrades the
sap proteins to produce allergens. Adding sulfur in liquid latex
and then heating transforms latex into an elastic compound by a
process called vulcanization. The manufacturing process leaches
the allergens by soaking the rubber products in hot water. The
leaching water is changed repeatedly to decrease the concentration
of the allergens, but leaching brings other allergens to the surface
and, unfortunately, places the highest concentrations near the skin
of the wearer. The cornstarch used in powdered latex gloves may
also be the cause of glove allergy, although the allergen in the glove
powder is usually latex released from the glove into the powder.

Biocompatibility

377

Thus the allergenicity of a given batch of latex will be dependent
on how the latex was collected, preserved, and processed.

Allergic Reactions
The clinical symptoms associated with latex are contact dermatitis
and local urticaria but also general urticaria, rhinoconjunctivitis,
asthma, Quincke’s edema, and in severe cases, anaphylaxis. Both
type I and type IV reactions have been reported from contact
with latex. After a 2016 review including data from the literature,
the FDA suggested that the average prevalence of latex allergy
worldwide remains at 9.7% among health care workers, 7.2% for
susceptible patients, and 4.3% for the general population. Natural
rubber latex (NRL) is the most noted cause of contact urticaria
for dental personnel. Dental patients are also a special risk group
because mucosal contact in sensitized individuals usually produces
a stronger reaction than skin contact. Dental students showed an
increasing incidence of type I allergies to latex gloves during the
course of study.
Precautionary Measures
A thorough medical history specifically asking for a possible latex
allergy is mandatory for any new patient in the office and should
be documented throughout the course of treatment and followup. In cases of latex allergy, latex-free rubber-dam products and
nitrile gloves must be used. Dental personnel should try to prevent
a sensitization against latex by using nonpowdered, low-allergenic
latex products or using latex-free products such as nitrile gloves.
If an individual is sensitized, any contact with latex products has
to be avoided. Again, nitrile gloves may be an alternative to latex
gloves.

Patient Reports and Complaints of
Adverse Effects
As mentioned in the discussion of postmarket surveillance, physicians, dentists, pharmacists, nurses, other health care professionals, and any other member of the public can report suspected
adverse effects of medication or devices on the FDA MedWatch
website. The devices also include restorations and implants. The
number of cases related to dentistry is rather low; it is often a challenge to find the cause for the complaints and isolate the dental
material that is responsible.
A national reporting system, the Dental Biomaterials Adverse
Reaction Unit (DBARU), was established at the University of Bergen in Norway to monitor adverse reactions to dental materials in
1993. Similar systems were also established in Sweden in 1996,
which were phased out in 2002, and in the United Kingdom in
1999. Some findings from the current literature are presented next.
A study comprising 500 patients claiming their complaints
were caused by dental materials has been published. Subjective
complaints reported by 490 patients mainly included burning
mouth (44%), tooth-/jaw-ache (22%), and dry mouth (20%).
The main objective intraoral symptoms were tongue anomalies
(14%), gingivitis adjacent to restorations (12%), redness of the
palate or the edentulous ridge (7%), oral lichen planus (6%),
grayish discolorations (5%), lichenoid contact lesions (3%), and
leukoplakia (2%). Only 46% of the patients showed objective
symptoms. Patch tests confirmed the complaints or symptoms in
14% patients, with metals being the most frequent allergens.
Patients with non-oral-related complaints, such as weakness,
headache, or intestinal problems, which have also been reported

378

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

in other studies, are a challenge for the clinician because these
symptoms are unspecific, and there are many potential causes for
these symptoms. For the symptoms of burning mouth or taste
irritation, it should be considered that these are among the most
common side effects of medical drugs. Dry mouth may also be
a symptom for a patient’s Sjögren syndrome. Therefore an interdisciplinary approach to the diagnosis and treatment of these
patients is necessary.
The age and sex distributions of the studies discussed all
show that elderly patients and females predominated. A reason
for this specific age distribution may be the fact that patients in
this age group are exposed to a large number of dental materials. One may assume that the high portion of females in the
middle-aged and elderly age groups might be caused by endocrine changes. However, literature reviews show that the role
of hormones in affecting oral health (e.g., burning mouth) and
hormone replacement therapy is not yet confirmed. It has also
been speculated that females are more likely to report adverse
reactions than males.

change in the composition or processing of a material can cause
a significant change in the material’s biocompatibility. In case of
doubt, clinicians should ask the manufacturer for specific information. They also should request written information from the
lab technicians certifying that the materials used are the ones the
clinician has prescribed and that all instructions for use of the
manufacturer have been followed. Generally, caution is advised
in applying previous biological data and processing principles to
new situations.

CRITICAL QUESTION

In vitro or animal tests are sometimes difficult to relate to clinical
applications. However, there are instances when clinicians do not
have sufficient data from clinical trials to make an informed decision, so they must rely on in vitro or animal tests. Clinicians should
not simply accept nondescript statements, such as “The material
has been subjected to biocompatibility tests, and no adverse effects
were observed,” but should ask for the type of tests used. If clinical
trial results are available, inquiring if the conditions and duration
of the test are relevant for the practice is important.
The quality and relevance of usage test data depend on the fidelity of reproducing the clinical use. If animal or in vitro test results
are the only ones available, then clinicians should question the
design of these tests and the methods employed, making sure that
testing conditions were as relevant as possible, including multiple
types of tests performed under different clinically relevant conditions. A well-controlled comparison with existing similar types of
materials is always preferable to an isolated test on one material.
The known potential or claimed adverse effects of dental materials, such as those summarized in Table 17-1, should be investigated periodically to ensure that patients will be presented with
accurate information related to the benefits and risks of proposed
treatments.

What information is required to judge the safety of metallic, resin composite,
and ceramic products?

Clinical Guidelines for Selecting
Biocompatible Materials
Clinicians need to evaluate claims of the biological safety of new
materials made by the manufacturers. With knowledge of biocompatibility issues, clinicians can make rational judgments about
biological safety. Several critical steps described here will ensure an
informed decision.

Define the Intended Use and Indications for
Restorative Materials
As discussed previously, the intended use of a material plays a
crucial role in the material’s biocompatibility. Clinicians should
inquire when the material is proposed for a new indication and
if the material has been tested in the proposed use. If the material is used in a new way or new environment, more caution is
advised. To minimize the risk of litigation resulting from unexpected adverse events, the lab technician and dentist must adhere
to the instructions for use and use the material as indicated by the
manufacturers. For other applications, such as off-label use, the
practitioner is fully liable for any adverse effects that may occur.
Furthermore, many dental materials are supplied by the manufacturer as a semifinal product, and the dentist finalizes the product
through other processes, such as light curing a resin composite.
Correct handling according to the instructions for use is essential
for acceptable biocompatibility.

Identify the Main Components of the Material
The principal components of materials are listed in the SDS,
but this list is not always complete, and elemental concentrations are not included. This is especially relevant for potential
allergens, where even small amounts in the material may cause
adverse reactions. Studies have shown repeatedly that a small

CRITICAL QUESTION
A sales representative introduces a new restorative material in your office
or at a trade show. What do you need to know from him or her about the
material’s biocompatibility tests?

Evaluate the Safety and Performance of
Dental Materials

CRITICAL QUESTION
Based on the effect of substances eluted from dental materials on the immune
system, who is responsible for deciding which materials are biologically safe
for use—the patient, the dentist, the manufacturer, or the FDA?

Risks Versus Benefits of Dental Materials
The risk of using Ni-Cr alloy for crowns and bridges is the potential of releasing cations as a result of corrosion, especially at low
pH values. These ions may be distributed in the oral cavity and
may enter the systemic circulatory system. The benefit of using
an Ni-Cr alloy over a high-noble alloy is the low cost and higher
elastic modulus of the Ni-Cr alloy. In the case of bis-GMA–based
resin, one of the potential adverse effects is the release of BPA.
However, the quantity of BPA released is extremely small, and the
sealing of pits and fissures in enamel surfaces is a highly effective
means for preventing caries lesions or lesion progression in these

CHAPTER 17

TABLE 17-1

Potential and Claimed Adverse Effects
and Drawbacks of Dental Restorative
Materials

Restorative Material

Potential Adverse Effects

Dental amalgam

Contact dermatitis or sensitization/allergic
reactions to metal elements
Localized lichenoid lesions
Postoperative sensitivity
Thermal sensitivity of pulp
Symptoms of mercury toxicity, especially
neurotoxicity
Environmental concerns

Dental adhesives/
resin composites

Contact dermatitis or sensitization/allergic
reactions to methacrylates
Localized lichenoid lesions
Estrogenic effects of bisphenol A
Postoperative sensitivity from polymerization
stresses and marginal gaps
Pulp damage in deep cavities/pulp exposure
Cytotoxicity or genotoxic effects

Dental alloys

Contact dermatitis or sensitization/allergic
reactions to metals, especially nickel,
cobalt, and beryllium
Localized lichenoid lesions
Thermal sensitivity of pulp
Systemic effects of leached metal ions

Conventional glassionomer cements

Postoperative pain (luting materials)
Pulp damage when placed on exposed pulp

Resin-modified glassionomer cements

Contact dermatitis or sensitization/allergic
reaction to methacrylates
Localized lichenoid lesion
Postoperative sensitivity from polymerization
stresses and marginal gaps
Pulp damage in deep cavities/pulp exposure
Cytotoxicity or genotoxic effects
Systemic effects of other free monomers or
leached substances

Dental ceramic

Respiratory effects from silica dust,
excessive wear of antagonist tooth
structure
Radioactivity
Toxicity of hydrofluoric acid

sites. Both examples depict the process of comparing the risks and
benefits of a material.

Anamnesis (Patient’s Account of Medical History)
Dental practitioners cannot simply follow a “cookbook” approach
to select restorative materials for their patients. Instead, they must
use their best clinical judgment based on scientific evidence and
personal experience with the material and, more importantly,
statements from patients, their physicians, and their previous dentists to ensure that all possible risks are minimized. For example,
local and systemic allergic reactions to many alloys have been
observed, with nickel being the most frequent allergenic element.
Questioning the patient, parent, or caregiver about existing allergies would quickly eliminate certain alloys from consideration.
Also, severe renal disease with impaired renal clearing function is

Biocompatibility

379

a contraindication for amalgam use. Information provided by the
patient should be documented and regularly updated.

Treatment Planning
There is considerable variability in the treatment-planning process. The benefits and risks stated to patients by their practitioners
are also likely to vary significantly from practice to practice. Obviously, some of the decisions will be based on accepting greater
risks for the predicted benefits, whereas others will be based on
a very conservative philosophy, which suggests that the risks of
adverse effects should be exceptionally low. In some of these
cases, when considerable risks exist, no treatment may be the best
choice. For example, if some patients claim that they are allergic
to several types of potential allergens, including metals, cosmetics,
and foodstuffs, extreme caution is indicated to minimize related
items. However, if the restorative treatment is essential to restore
occlusion and function, these risks may be accepted, although
informed consent procedures must still be satisfied before treatment begins. Once the practitioner makes a treatment decision,
the patient should be informed of the benefits and risks of the
proposed treatment and of any alternative treatments. Then, for
medical and legal requirements to be satisfied, the patient must
give his or her consent for the proposed treatment.

Risk Communication
Patients may ask the dentist before the treatment if the materials
selected are safe. From a patient’s viewpoint, safety often means
that nothing bad will ever happen. However, this is not always
possible. One may ask the patients about their hobbies or favorite
sports and then inquire about the potential risks these activities
may carry. The patients may soon realize that there is always a
chance for adverse events to happen.
The clinician can refer to the fact that the probability of
adverse effects from dental materials is generally low (0.3%). In
contrast, the rate of adverse reactions toward cosmetic products
has been reported as 12%. This means that the probability for
an adverse reaction from contact with dental materials is about
40 times less than that with cosmetics if generally accepted good
practice for patient treatment is followed. Finally, the risk should
be “individualized,” meaning the clinician should explain to the
patient the specific situation in the patient’s case, such as allergies, cavity sizes, or the situation of the dentition in general.
This specific and unique expertise enables the clinician to put
Internet-derived information into clinical perspective for individual patients.

Acknowledgments
The contributions of Dr. Ken Anusavice and Dr. John Wataha
to the previous versions of this chapter are greatly appreciated.
Their conceptual descriptions and images were developed for Figures 17-5, 17-6, 17-7, 17-11, and 17-12. Dr. Yeong-Joon Park
provided helpful suggestions and several images. The input of Michael E. Adjodha, Dental Devices Branch, Center for Devices and
Radiological Health, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, is also
greatly appreciated. Dr. Donald Cohen provided clinical images
of lichenoid lesions. The artistic suggestions of Dr. Inchan Ko and
Miss Jihae Ahn are also appreciated.

380

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Selected Readings
Bellinger DC, Trachtenberg F, Barregard L, et al: Neuropsychological and
renal effects of dental amalgam in children: A randomized clinical
trial, JAMA 295:1775–1783, 2006.
Bergenholtz G: Evidence for bacterial causation of adverse pulpal
responses in resin-based dental restorations, Crit Rev Oral Biol Med
11:467–480, 2000.
De Souza Costa CA, Hebling J, Scheffel DLS, et al: Methods to evaluate
and strategies to improve the biocompatibility of dental materials and
operative techniques, Dent Mater 30:769–784, 2014.
DeRouen TA, Martin MD, Leroux BG, et al: Neurobehavioral effects
of dental amalgam in children: A randomized clinical trial, JAMA
295:1784–1792, 2006.
Geurtsen W: Biocompatibility of dental casting alloys, Crit Rev Oral Biol
Med 13:71–84, 2002.

Mittermüller P, Hiller KA, Schmalz G, et al: Five hundred patients reporting on adverse effects from dental materials: Frequencies, complaints,
symptoms, allergies, Dent Mater 34:1756–1768, 2018.
Schmalz G, Arenholt-Bindslev D, editors: Biocompatibility of Dental
Material. Berlin-Heidelberg, 2009, Springer.
Schmalz G, Galler KM: Biocompatibility of biomaterials−lessons learned
and considerations for the design of novel materials, Dent Mater 33:
382–393, 2017.
Schweikl H, Spagnuolo G, Schmalz G: Genetic and cellular toxicology of
dental resin monomers, J Dent Res 85:870–877, 2006.
Wataha JC: Predicting clinical biological responses to dental materials,
Dent Mater 28:23–40, 2012.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult
.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Aalto-Korte K, Alanko K, Kuuliala O, et al: Methacrylate and acrylate
allergy in dental personnel, Contact Derm 57:324–330, 2007.
Ajiboye AS, Mossey PA, IADR Science Information Committee, et al:
International Association for Dental Research Policy and Position
Statements on the Safety of Dental Amalgam, J Dent Res, published
online April 21, 2020.
Aller AJ: The clinical significance of beryllium, J Trace Elem Electrolytes
Health Dis 4:1–6, 1990.
American Dental Association: Reported sensitivity to glass ionomer luting cements. Council on Dental Materials, Instruments, and Equipment, J Am Dent Assoc 109:476, 1984.
American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs: Determination of bisphenol a released from resin-based composite dental restoratives, J Am Dent Assoc 145:763–766, 2014.
Arenholt-Bindslev D, Breinholt V, Preiss A, et al: Time-related bisphenolA content and estrogenic activity in saliva samples collected in relation
to placement of fissure sealants, Clin Oral Investig 3:120–125, 1999.
Arenholt-Bindslev D, Jolanki R, Kanerva L: Diagnosis of side effects of dental materials, with special emphasis on delayed and immediate allergic
reactions. In Schmalz G, Arenholt-Bindslev D, editors: Biocompatiblity of
Dental Materials, Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, Springer, pp. 335–366.
Ashby J, Ishidate M Jr, Stoner GD, et al: Studies on the genotoxicity of
beryllium sulphate in vitro and in vivo, Mutat Res 240:217–225, 1990.
Bellinger DC, Trachtenberg F, Barregard L, et al: Neuropsychological and renal effects of dental amalgam in children: A randomized
clinical trial, JAMA 295:1775–1783, 2006.
Bergenholtz G: Evidence for bacterial causation of adverse pulpal
responses in resin-based dental restorations, Crit Rev Oral Biol
Med 11:467–480, 2000.
Berglund A: Estimation by a 24-hour study of the daily dose of intra-oral
mercury vapor inhaled after release from dental amalgam, J Dent Res
69:1646–1651, 1990.
Bolewska J, Holmstrup P, Moller-Madsen B, et al: Amalgam associated
mercury accumulations in normal oral mucosa, oral mucosal lesions
of lichen planus and contact lesions associated with amalgam, J Oral
Pathol Med 19:39–42, 1990.
Bumgardner JD, Lucas LC, Alverson MW Jr, et al: Effects of copperbased dental casting alloys on two lymphocyte cell lines and the secretion of interleukin 2 and IgG, Dent Mater 9:85–90, 1993.
Clarkson TW, Magos L: The toxicology of mercury and its chemical compounds, Crit Rev Toxicol 36:609–662, 2006.
De Souza Costa CA, Hebling J, Scheffel DLS, et al: Methods to evaluate and strategies to improve the biocompatibility of dental materials and operative techniques, Dent Mater 30:769–784, 2014.
DeRouen TA, Martin MD, Leroux BG, et al: Neurobehavioral effects
of dental amalgam in children: A randomized clinical trial, JAMA
295:1784–1792, 2006.
Ditrichova D, Kapralova S, Tichy M, et al: Oral lichenoid lesions and
allergy to dental materials, Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc
Czech Repub 151:333–339, 2007.
Donati ME, Savarino L, Granchi D, et al: The effects of metal corrosion
debris on immune system cells, Chir Organi Mov 83:387–393, 1998.
Dye BA, Schober SE, Dillon CF, et al: Urinary mercury concentrations
associated with dental restorations in adult women aged 16–49 years:
United States, 1999–2000, Occup Environ Med 62:368–375, 2005.
Eckhardt A, Harorli T, Limtanyakul J, et al: Inhibition of cytokine and
surface antigen expression in LPS-stimulated murine macrophages by
triethylene glycol dimethacrylate, Biomaterials 30:1665–1674, 2009.
Ehrlich A, Kucenic M, Belsito DV: Role of body piercing in the induction of metal allergies, Am J Contact Dermat 12:151–155, 2001.
Ekstrand J, Björkman L, Edlund C, et al: Toxicological aspects on the
release and systemic uptake of mercury from dental amalgam, Eur J
Oral Sci 106:678–686, 1998.
Ersev H, Schmalz G, Bayirli G, et al: Cytotoxic and mutagenic potencies
of various root canal filling materials in eukaryotic and prokaryotic
cells in vitro, J Endod 25:359–363, 1999.

European Commission: Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly
Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR): Opinion on the safety of the
use of bisphenol A in medical devices. Adopted on February 18, 2015.
https://ec.europa.eu/health/scientific_committees/emerging/docs/
scenihr_o_040.pdf.
European Commission: Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly
Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR): The safety of dental amalgam
and alternative dental restoration materials for patients and users.
Adopted on April 29, 2015. https://ec.europa.eu/health/scientific_
committees/emerging/docs/scenihr_o_046.pdf.
FDI World Dental Federation: Recommended standard practices for
biological evaluation of dental materials. Federation Dentaire International, Commission of Dental Materials, Instruments, Equipment
and Therapeutics, Int Dent J 30:140–188, 1980.
Fujioka-Kobayashi M, Miron RJ, Lussi A, et al: Effect of the degree of
conversion of resin-based composites on cytotoxicity, cell attachment,
and gene expression, Dent Mater 35:1173–1193, 2019.
Galler K, Hiller KA, Ettl T, et al: Selective influence of dentin thickness
upon cytotoxicity of dentin contacting materials, J Endod 31:396–
399, 2005.
Galler KM, Schweikl H, Hiller KA, et al: TEGDMA reduces mineralization in dental pulp cells, J Dent Res 90:257–262, 2011.
Garhammer P, Schmalz G, Hiller KA, et al: Patients with local adverse
effects from dental alloys: Frequency, complaints, symptoms, allergy,
Clin Oral Investig 5:240–249, 2001.
Gell PGH, Coombs RRA: The classification of allergic reactions underlying disease. In Coombs RRA, Gells PGH, editors: Clinical Aspects of
Immunology, Oxford, 1963, Blackwell.
Geurtsen W: Biocompatibility of dental casting alloys, Crit Rev Oral
Biol Med 13:71–84, 2002.
Goon AT, Isaksson M, Zimerson E, et al: Contact allergy to (meth)acrylates in the dental series in southern Sweden: Simultaneous positive
patch test reaction patterns and possible screening allergens, Contact
Derm 55:219–226, 2006.
Hallstrom U: Adverse reaction to a fissure sealant: report of case, ASDC J
Dent Child 60:143–146, 1993.
Hannig C, Hannig M: The oral cavity—a key system to understand substratum-dependent bioadhesion on solid surfaces in man, Clin Oral
Investig 13:123–139, 2009.
Hartwig A: Current aspects in metal genotoxicity, Biometals 8:3–11,
1995.
Hayes RB: The carcinogenicity of metals in humans, Cancer Cause Control 8:371–385, 1997.
He X, Reichl FX, Wang Y, et al: Analysis of titanium and other metals
in human jawbones with dental implants—a case series study, Dent
Mater 32:1042–1051, 2016.
Hebling J, Lessa FC, Nogueira I, et al: Cytotoxicity of resin-based lightcured liners, Am J Dent 22:137–142, 2009.
Heese A, Peters KP, Stahl J, et al: [Incidence and increase in type I allergies
to rubber gloves in dental medicine students], Hautarzt 46:15–21, 1995.
Heil J, Reifferscheid G, Waldmann P, et al: Genotoxicity of dental materials, Mutat Res 368:181–194, 1996.
Hensten-Pettersen A: Casting alloys: Side-effects, Adv Dent Res 6:38–43,
1992.
Hildebrand HF, Veron C, Martin P: [Non-precious metal dental alloys
and allergy], J Biol Buccale 17:227–243, 1989.
Hörsted-Bindslev P: Amalgam toxicity-environmental and occupational
hazards, J Dent 32:359–365, 2004.
Hosoki M, Bando E, Asaoka K, et al: Assessment of allergic hypersensitivity to dental materials, Biomed Mater Eng 19:53–61, 2009.
IARC: IARC monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to
Human—Beyllium and Beryllium compounds. Lyon, France, 2018,
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Imazato S: Bio-active restorative materials with antibacterial effects: New
dimension of innovation in restorative dentistry, Dent Mater J 28:11–
19, 2009.
Izumi AK: Allergic contact gingivostomatitis due to gold, Arch Dermatol
Res 272:387–391, 1982.
380.e1

Jones DW: Exposure or absorption and the crucial question of limits for
mercury, J Can Dent Assoc 65:42–46, 1999.
Jonsson F, Sandborgh-Englund G, Johanson G: A compartmental model
for the kinetics of mercury vapor in humans, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
155:161–168, 1999.
Kanerva L, Rantanen T, Aalto-Korte K, et al: A multicenter study of
patch test reactions with dental screening series, Am J Contact Dermat
12:83–87, 2001.
Kanerva L, Toikkanen J, Jolanki R, et al: Statistical data on occupational
contact urticaria, Contact Derma 35:229–333, 1996.
Kansu G, Aydin AK: Evaluation of the biocompatibility of various dental
alloys: Part I—toxic potentials, Eur J Prosthodont Restor Dent 4:129–
136, 1996.
Kansu G, Aydin AK: Evaluation of the biocompatibility of various dental
alloys: Part 2—allergenical potentials, Eur J Prosthodont Restor Dent
4:155–161, 1996.
Karatasli B, Karatasli G, Mete O, et al: Healing of oral lichenoid lesions
following replacement of dental amalgam restorations with feldspathic ceramic inlay-onlay restorations: clinical results of a follow-up
period varied from three months up to five years, Biomed Res Int 2018
(2):1–7, 2018.
Kerosuo H, Kullaa A, Kerosuo E, et al: Nickel allergy in adolescents in
relation to orthodontic treatment and piercing of ears, Am J Orthod
Dentofacial Orthop 109:148–154, 1996.
Khamaysi Z, Bergman R, Weltfriend S: Positive patch test reactions to
allergens of the dental series and the relation to the clinical presentations, Contact Derma 55:216–218, 2006.
Khan MA, Williams RL, Williams DF: Conjoint corrosion and wear in
titanium alloys, Biomaterials 20:765–772, 1999.
Kingman A, Albertini T, Brown LJ: Mercury concentrations in urine
and whole blood associated with amalgam exposure in a US military
population, J Dent Res 77:461–471, 1998.
Krifka S, Spagnuolo G, Schmalz G, et al: A review of adaptive mechanisms in cell responses towards oxidative stress caused by dental resin
monomers, Biomaterials 34:4555–4563, 2013.
Kristoffersen AE, Alraek T, Stub T, et al: Health complaints attributed
to dental amalgam: A retrospective survey exploring perceived health
changes related to amalgam removal. Open Dent J 10:739–751, 2016.
Kuroda K, Endo G, Okamoto A, et al: Genotoxicity of beryllium, gallium
and antimony in short-term assays, Mutat Res 264:163–170, 1991.
Laeijendecker R, Dekker SK, Burger PM, et al: Oral lichen planus and
allergy to dental amalgam restorations, Arch Dermatol 140:1434–
1438, 2004.
Laeijendecker R, van Joost T: Oral manifestations of gold allergy, J Am
Acad Dermatol 30:205–209, 1994.
Langworth S, Elinder CG, Akesson A: Mercury exposure from dental
fillings. I. Mercury concentrations in blood and urine, Swed Dent J
12:69–70, 1988.
Langworth S, Kölbeck KG, Akesson A: Mercury exposure from dental
fillings. II. Release and absorption, Swed Dent J 12:71–72, 1988.
Loden M, Wessman C: Mascaras may cause irritant contact dermatitis,
Int J Cosmet Sci 24:281–285, 2002.
Lygre GB, Gjerdet NR, Gronningsaeter AG, et al: Reporting on adverse
reactions to dental materials-intraoral observations at a clinical followup, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 31:200–206, 2003.
Mackert JR Jr, Berglund A: Mercury exposure from dental amalgam fillings: Absorbed dose and the potential for adverse health effects, Crit
Rev Oral Biol Med 8:410–436, 1997.
Marcusson JA: Contact allergies to nickel sulfate, gold sodium thiosulfate
and palladium chloride in patients claiming side-effects from dental
alloy components, Contact Derma 34:320–323, 1996.
Melchart D, Vogt S, Kohler W, et al: Treatment of health complaints
attributed to amalgam, J Dent Res 87:349–353, 2008.
Meurman JH, Tarkkila L, Tiitinen A: The menopause and oral health,
Maturitas 63:56–62, 2009.
Mittermüller P, Hiller KA, Schmalz G, et al: Five hundred patients
reporting on adverse effects from dental materials: frequencies,
complaints, symptoms, allergies, Dent Mater 34:1756–1768, 2018.
380.e2

Mjor IA, Hensten-Pettersen A, Skogedal O: Biologic evaluation of filling materials. A comparison of results using cell culture techniques,
implantation tests and pulp studies, Int Dent J 27:124–129, 1977.
Munksgaard EC: Permeability of protective gloves by HEMA and TEGDMA in the presence of solvents, Acta Odontol Scand 58:57–62,
2000.
Munksgaard EC, Hansen EK, Engen T, et al: Self-reported occupational
dermatological reactions among Danish dentists, Eur J Oral Sci 104:
396–402, 1996.
Murray PE, Hafez AA, Smith AJ, et al: Hierarchy of pulp capping and
repair activities responsible for dentin bridge formation, Am J Dent
15:236–243, 2002.
Nerdrum P, Malt UF, Hoglend P, et al: A 7-year prospective quasiexperimental study of the effects of removing dental amalgam in 76
self-referred patients compared with 146 controls, J Psychosom Res
57:103–111, 2004.
Nicolae A, Ames H, Quinonez C: Dental amalgam and urinary mercury concentrations: A descriptive study, BMC Oral Health 13(1):44,
2013.
Olea N, Pulgar R, Pérez P, et al: Estrogenicity of resin-based composites
and sealants used in dentistry, Environ Health Perspect 104:298–305,
1996.
Piirila P, Kanerva L, Keskinen H, et al: Occupational respiratory hypersensitivity caused by preparations containing acrylates in dental personnel, Clin Exp Allergy 28:1404–1411, 1998.
Pongprueksa P, De Munck J, Duca RC, et al: Monomer elution in relation to degree of conversion for different types of composite, J Dent
43:1448–1455, 2015.
Putzeys E, Nys S, Cokic SM, et al: Long-term elution of monomers from
resin-based dental composites, Dent Mater 35:477–485, 2019.
Raap U, Stiesch M, Reh H, et al: Investigation of contact allergy to dental
metals in 206 patients, Contact Derma 60:339–343, 2009.
Rajan TV: The Gell-Coombs classification of hypersensitivity reactions: A
re-interpretation, Trends Immunol 24:376–379, 2003.
Ribeiro APD, Sacono NT, Soares DG, et al: Human pulp response to
conventional and resin-modified glass ionomer cements applied in
very deep cavities, Clin Oral Investig 24:1739–1748, 2020.
Rooney JP: The retention time of inorganic mercury in the brain—a systematic review of the evidence, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 274:425–435,
2014.
Schaffran RM, Storrs FJ, Schalock P: Prevalence of gold sensitivity in
asymptomatic individuals with gold dental restorations, Am J Contact
Dermatitis 10:201–206, 1999.
Schmalz G, Arenholt-Bindslev D, editors: Biocompatiblity of Dental
Materials, Berlin-Heidelberg, 2009, Springer.
Schmalz G, Galler KM: Biocompatibility of biomaterials—lessons
learned and considerations for the design of novel materials, Dent
Mater 33:382–393, 2017.
Schmalz G, Hickel R, van Landuyt KL, et al: Nanoparticles in dentistry,
Dent Mater 33:1298–1314, 2017.
Schmalz G, Hickel R, van Landuyt KL, et al: Scientific update on
nanoparticles in dentistry, Int Dent J 68:299–305, 2018.
Schmalz G, Langer H, Schweikl H: Cytotoxicity of dental alloy extracts
and corresponding metal salt solutions, J Dent Res 77:1772–1778,
1998.
Schmalz G, Preiss A, Arenholt-Bindslev D: Bisphenol-A content of
resin monomers and related degradation products, Clin Oral Investig
3:114–119, 1999.
Schmalz G, Schuster U, Thonemann B, et al: Dentin barrier test with
transfected bovine pulp-derived cells, J Endod 27:96–102, 2001.
Schmalz G, Thonemann B, Riedel M, et al. Biological and clinical investigations of a glass ionomer base material, Dent Mater 10:304–313,
1994.
Schmalz G, Widbiller M, Galler KM: Material tissue interaction—from
toxicity to tissue regeneration, Oper Dent 41:117–131, 2016.
Schweikl H, Petzel C, Bolay C, et al: 2-Hydroxyethyl methacrylateinduced apoptosis through the ATM- and p53-dependent intrinsic
mitochondrial pathway, Biomaterials 35:2890–2904, 2014.

Schweikl H, Spagnuolo G, Schmalz G: Genetic and cellular toxicology of dental resin monomers, J Dent Res 85:870–877, 2006.
Scott A, Egner W, Gawkrodger DJ, et al: The national survey of adverse
reactions to dental materials in the UK: A preliminary study by the UK
Adverse Reactions Reporting Project, Br Dent J 196:471–477, 2004.
Sicilia A, Cuesta S, Coma G, et al: Titanium allergy in dental implant
patients: A clinical study on 1500 consecutive patients, Clin Oral
Implants Res 19:823–835, 2008.
Sidhu S K, Nicholson JW: A review of glass-ionomer cements for clinical
dentistry, J Funct Biomater, 2016 16(1-15) 7.
Soares DG, Basso FG, Scheffel DL, et al: Biocompatibility of a restorative
resin-modified glass ionomer cement applied in very deep cavities prepared in human teeth, Gen Dent 64:33–40, 2016.
Spranley TJ, Winkler M, Dagate J, et al: Curing light burns, Gen Dent
60:e210–e214, 2012.
Suri V, Suri V: Menopause and oral health, J Midlife Health 5:115–120,
2014.
Tarlo SM, Sussman GL, Holness DL: Latex sensitivity in dental students and
staff: A cross-sectional study, J Allergy Clin Immunol 99:396–401, 1997.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Biological Responses to Metal
Implants. U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2019.
Vamnes JS, Lygre GB, Gronningsaeter AG, et al: Four years of clinical
experience with an adverse reaction unit for dental biomaterials, Community Dent Oral 32:150–157, 2004.
Van Landuyt KL, Nawrot T, Geebelen B, et al: How much do resin-based
dental materials release? A meta-analytical approach, Dent Mater
27:723–747, 2011.
Veronese I, Guzzi G, Giussani A, et al: Determination of dose rates from
natural radionuclides in dental materials, J Environ Radioact 91:15–
26, 2006.

Wataha JC: Biocompatibility of dental casting alloys: A review, J Prosthet
Dent 83:223–834, 2000.
Wataha JC: Predicting clinical biological responses to dental materials, Dent Mater 28:23–40, 2012.
Wataha JC, Craig RG, Hanks CT: The release of elements of dental
casting alloys into cell-culture medium, J Dent Res 70:1014–1018,
1991.
Wataha JC, Hanks CT: Biological effects of palladium and risk of using
palladium in dental casting alloys, J Oral Rehabil 23:309–320,
1996.
Wataha JC, Hanks CT, Sun Z: In vitro reaction of macrophages to metal
ions from dental biomaterials, Dent Mater 11:239–245, 1995.
Wataha JC, Schmalz G: Dental Alloys. In Schmalz G, Anrenholt-Bindslev D, editors: Biocompatibility of Dental Materials. Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, Springer, pp 211–254.
Widbiller M, Lindner SR, Buchalla W, et al: Three-dimensional culture of
dental pulp stem cells in direct contact to tricalcium silicate cements,
Clin Oral Investig 20:237–246, 2016.
Wrangsjö K, Swartling C, Meding B: Occupational dermatitis in dental
personnel: Contact dermatitis with special reference to (meth)acrylates in 174 patients, Contact Derma 45:158–163, 2001.
Wu M, McIntosh J, Liu J: Current prevalence rate of latex allergy: Why it
remains a problem? J Occup Health 58:138–144, 2016.
Yang J, Shanbhag A, Lilien J, et al: Human neutrophil response to
short-term exposure to F-75 cobalt-based alloy, J Biomed Mater Res
26:1217–1230, 1992.
Yin L, Yu K, Lin S, et al: Associations of blood mercury, inorganic mercury, methyl mercury and bisphenol A with dental surface restorations
in the U.S. population, NHANES 2003–2004 and 2010–2012, Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 134(part 1):213–225, 2016.

380.e3

