20

Emerging Technologies
OUTLINE
Biomaterials

Instruments and Processes

Biological Materials

Summary

KEY TERMS
Bioactive Having an effect on or eliciting a response from living
tissue, an organism, or a cell, especially in inducing the formation of superficial hydroxyapatite.
Bioinductive Capable of inducing a response in a biological
system.
Biomaterial Any matter, surface, or construct that interacts with
biological systems.
Biomimetics Study of the formation, structure, or function of biologically produced substances and materials (e.g., silk or nacre)
and biological mechanisms and processes (e.g., protein synthesis or mineralization) for the purpose of synthesizing similar
products by artificial mechanisms that mimic natural structures.
CAD-CAM CAD refers to computer-aided design technology, based
on the use of computer software and systems to assist in the creation, modification, analysis, and optimization of two-dimensional
or three-dimensional models of objects. Any computer program
that embodies computer graphics and an application program
that facilitates engineering functions in the design process can
be classified as CAD software. The term CAM refers to computeraided manufacturing of a restorative device using the CAD input
file. CAM may be additive (buildup) or subtractive (machining of a
device from a larger starting piece of material).

Cytology The harvesting of disaggregated cells and related microscopic material for analysis of disease.
Nanotechnology Technology that focuses on the atomic and
molecular scale (<100 nm) of materials, devices, and other structures. On this scale, in which at least one dimension must be
below 100 nm, quantum mechanics (quantum theory) controls
material properties or behavior.
Osteoconductive Capable of acting as a matrix or scaffold to
facilitate new bone growth on its surface.
Self-assembling materials Disordered materials that form an
organized structure or pattern as a consequence of specific,
local interactions among the components, without external
direction.
Smart materials Synthetic materials that interact with external
stimuli, such as light, temperature, stress, moisture, pH, and
electric/magnetic fields, in such a way as to alter specific properties in a controlled fashion and return to the original state after
the stimulus has been removed.
Voxel Volumetric picture element that represents a single sample,
or data point, on a regularly spaced three-dimensional grid. It
is analogous to how pixel defines a point in two-dimensional
space.

The materials and devices in current use are effective, but improvements in performance are always needed. For instance, caries-prevention treatments have reduced the need for initial restorations,
replacement restorations, and removable dentures. Minimally
invasive dentistry concepts have led to the removal of less tooth
structure and the sealing of leaking defective margins of restorations. Nonetheless, because of the promotion of higher-cost
esthetic restorations, sometimes at the expense of durability, the
need for both repair and replacement of restorations will continue
because resin restorative materials fail and degrade over time. Thus
the choice of materials for a given clinical situation will continue
to be based on a comparative analysis that balances cost, benefits,
and risks. Until caries is considered truly “curable,” there will be
a need for novel solutions, such as remineralizing agents, smart
materials, and durable repair and replacement materials that
avoid the need to repeatedly restore teeth. The focus of emerging
applications of dental materials is primarily on the prevention,

detection, and treatment of caries, periodontal disease, and oral
cancer. These materials are often called dental biomaterials
because of the increase of interaction with the biological systems.
New dental biomaterials must satisfy the following requirements: (1) be nontoxic to human cells, (2) not support the growth
of microbes and fungi, (3) be able to form an excellent seal between
the oral cavity and underlying tooth structure, (4) be sufficiently
bioactive to stimulate in vivo repair of tissues, (5) have properties
similar to the tissue that is to be repaired or replaced, (6) exhibit
handling properties that allow ease of manipulation and promote
optimal clinical performance, (7) exhibit an esthetically pleasing
appearance, and (8) are cost-effective.
In the following subsections, research and technologies are
discussed for their relevance to solving oral health–related problems. Figure 20-1 depicts a flowchart of basic, translational, and
clinical research representing stages in the development of emerging technologies and products. The farther to the right of the chart
401

402

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Research
stage

Basic
research

Technology
classification

Emerging
technology
concepts

Nanotechnology
advances

Nanotechnology
validation

Established
nanotechnology

Integrated
nanotechnology
and
microtechnology

Spin-off
technology

Cost-benefit
demonstrated

Testing
stage

Hypothesis
testing

Product
evaluation

Bridge between
basic/applied and
clinical practice

Pilot and
retrospective
studies

Randomized
controlled trials

Performance
appraisal

Refinement of
technologies

Outcomes

Preliminary
data

Comparative
performance

Preliminary
evidence

Validation of
evidence

Promising
treatment
outcomes

Optimum
treatment
outcomes

Adoption by
clinical
practices or
dental labs

Further
refinement
needed

Technologies
applied to
health care
tasks

Oral health
care goals
fully achieved

Application of
refined
technology

Demonstrated
benefits in
lab and
clinic tasks

Fully
documented
and wellestablished
evidence

Probable future
technologies,
materials, and
devices

Likely future
technologies,
materials, and
devices

Proven future
technologies,
materials, and
devices

Stage of
technology
development

Level of
evidence

Level of
success

Applied/transitional research

Technologies are feasible

Clinical
simulation

Proof of
concept

Desirable technologies,
materials, and devices

Clinical trials

Technologies are imminent
or validated

Probability of
specific
outcomes

Limited
applicability of
technology

Possible future
technologies,
materials, and devices

Applicability to
dental practices

• Figure 20-1 Flow chart of basic, translational, and clinical research links to develop and evaluate emerging technologies and products. The downward
arrows show the sequence of steps taken in the process. The rightward arrows show the increasingr probability of having a desirable clinical outcome.

a technology or material is, the higher the probability that this
material will have a desirable clinical outcome. The discussion is
divided into three sections: biomaterials, biological materials, and
instruments and processes.

Biomaterials
Any matter, surface, or construct that interacts with biological systems is considered to be a biomaterial. In the present context, only
synthetically derived or highly processed nonsynthetic materials
(materials of biological origin) are discussed. In dentistry, these are
also preferably known as dental materials.

CRITICAL QUESTION
In which ways will nanotechnology provide products or processes that can
improve oral health outcomes?

Nanotechnology
Nanotechnology uses nanosized particles and surface features
with very high ratios of surface area to volume that are usually
different in their bioactivity, solubility, and antimicrobial effects
compared with larger particles of the same composition. Thus
changes in properties cannot be extrapolated by an inverse linear analysis of particle size but must be determined through in
vitro and in vivo testing of the nanomaterials. In dentistry, nanotechnology had been focused on the development of nanoparticle

fillers to improve dental composite esthetics. The use of nanotechnology today is more diverse.
In biomimetics, nanotechnology is being used to develop
materials that promote hard tissue remineralization. Biomimetic
materials and processes mimic those that occur in nature, particularly self-assembly of components to form, replace, or repair oral
tissues. These concepts are discussed further later in this chapter.
For dental implants and related devices, nanoparticles are used
to modify dental implant surfaces to influence the host response
at the cellular and tissue levels. Electrophoretic sol-gel fabrication,
pulsed laser deposition, sputter coating, and ion-beam–assisted
deposition are among the approaches used to develop nanotextured, thin-film, biocompatible coatings for implant surfaces.
These technologies reduce the thickness of the coating layer and
increase the specific surface area and reactivity to improve the
interaction with the surrounding apical tissue.
Important nanoparticles include metals, such as silver, and
ceramic powders, such as silica and titanium dioxide. In situ–
generated silver nanoparticles have been reported to be highly
effective in restorative resins, bonding resins, and prosthetic resins for inhibiting a variety of biofilm-forming bacteria while not
interfering with manipulation, curing, mechanical properties, or
other performance properties. Silica nanoparticles already have
wide use in dentistry, from toothpastes to composites. Titania
nanoparticles are widely used for pigments in dental materials but
lack the stronger antimicrobial effects of Ag.
Another recently introduced nanotechnology kills bacteria
on contact on restoration surfaces. Infinix flowable composite

CHAPTER 20

(Nobio Ltd., Israel), which contains quaternary ammonium
bound to silica (also known as QASi) was reported to significantly
reduce Enterococcus faecalis on the surface of the material without
affecting composite flexural strength, radiopacity, depth of cure,
water sorption, or water solubility. After 6 and 12 months of use
in vivo, there was a 50% reduction of live bacteria on Nobio QASi
composites compared with control composites. An added advantage of the QASi-containing surfaces is that no “recharging” is
needed, unlike the fluoride in glass ionomers that confers microbial resistance. Prevention of bacterial biofilm protects the integrity of the dental product restorations.

Resin Restorative Materials
Despite the recent innovations in increasing the service life of
contemporary resin composites (see “Innovations in Dental Composites” in Chapter 5, Classification of Composites by Unique
Properties), significant uncertainty exists regarding the interactions of bacterial biofilms, wear, and fatigue leading to recurrent
caries. Thus further improvements are needed in order to greatly
increase the clinical life of resin-based restorations to match and
even surpass the durability of amalgam, the gold standard, and
eliminate the need to repair the restored teeth. To this end, major
goals for restorative materials continue to be the reduction of
composite shrinkage during curing, porosity, wear and attrition,
improvement of the composite–dentin interface, and increasing
the degree of conversion of resin monomers.
One factor that influences restorative longevity is operator
error. Materials with many steps, the requirements for a dry field,
difficult handling, or long curing times are inherently prone to
mistakes that often lead to material defects, such as voids and
inadequate curing, which hasten the onset of fatigue, fracture, and
abrasion. Thus more technique insensitive (“forgiving”), operatorfriendly, esthetic, and long-lived composites are being developed.
As discussed in Chapter 5, Classification of Composites by
Manipulation Characteristics, two novel flowable composites
marketed as “bulk-fill, universal restorative resins,” G-aenial
Universal Flo (GC America, Alsip, IL) and Surefil-SDR flow
(DENTSPLY International, York, PA), among others, exemplify
operator-friendly materials that are translucent and have flowable rheology, easy handling properties, and a large depth and
degree of conversion. Both exhibit low shrinkage and shrinkage
stress, which allow the composite to be placed in large increments
instead of the prescribed 2-mm layers, further contributing to
their technique insensitivity. Because these highly flowable composites contain reinforcing filler on a par with the highly loaded,
nonflowable, and “packable” hybrids, such as those described in
Chapter 5, Classification of Composites by Manipulation Characteristics, their performance is similar to those of current posterior
resins, raising expectations of high durability and long clinical life.
Early-stage wear resistance and durability tests have validated the
benefits of their high filler loading, low curing stress, and high
level and depth of cure.
Filtek Universal (3M ESPE, St. Paul, MN) is a recent addition (2019) to the category of operator-friendly composites.
The nanoparticle fillers in this composite provide superior shade
matching and wear resistance. This composite contains two
unique monomers: addition-fragmentation monomer (AFM) and
aromatic urethane dimethacrylate (AUDMA). The AFM fragments and repolymerizes during curing, reducing curing stress and
enhancing marginal integrity. The AUDMA decreases the number
of reactive groups in the resin and increases polymer flexibility.

Emerging Technologies

403

Fewer reactive groups moderate the volumetric shrinkage, and the
increased polymer flexibility reduces the stiffness of the polymer
matrix before the matrix reaches the gelation point. Both of these
contribute to decreased curing stress, improved marginal integrity,
and ultimately, improved abrasive wear resistance.
Omnichroma (Tokuyama Dental America) is a single-shade,
universal composite that matches every tooth shade, from A1 to
D4. The innovative material contains 260-nm spherical nanoparticles that can scatter red-to-yellow colors as ambient light impinges
on and is reflected from the composite. The red-to-yellow scattering blends with the scattered light of the adjacent dentition to
produce an esthetic color match and reduces operator sensitivity.

Bioactive Materials
Most present-day dental materials do not induce dental tissue
responses and are not bioactive. Bioactivity is defined in ISO
23317 as a property that elicits a specific biological response at
the interface of the material, which results in the formation of a
bond between tissue and material. As such, bioactivity incorporates antimicrobial, remineralizing, and bone-forming materials,
as discussed in this section. Bioactive materials implanted in a living body form a thin layer rich in Ca and P on their surface. The
material then connects to the living tissue through this apatite
layer without a distinct boundary. Bioactive materials are useful
for the healing of tissues, especially pulp and periapical tissues,
and for supporting root development in immature teeth.
Bioactive materials available now include calcium hydroxide,
bone grafts, bioglass particulates, and hydraulic (water-setting)
ceramic powders. The calcium–silicate powders are considered
the gold standard for endodontic surgical procedures, pulpotomy,
revascularization, and apexification procedures. The calcium aluminate–based powders, being more acid-resistant, are being used
with glass ionomers for supragingival cement for prosthodontics
and have found limited use for restorative applications. Their acid
resistance makes them useful for infected sites, which are generally
acidic; as such, the aluminates may be used for the same indications as mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) materials. Calcium
phosphate cements are generally slower-setting than the hydraulic
cements but are being used for scaffolding purposes where the formation of hydroxyapatite is necessary and porosity is acceptable.
Theobromine, a xanthine found in cocoa, promotes the formation of hydroxyapatite mineral and increases the size of hydroxyapatite crystals by upregulating osteogenesis, which would have
numerous benefits. For instance, theobromine may remineralize adjacent tooth enamel and have the potential to close gaps
between restoration and tooth, improve bond-strength durability associated with reduced bond degradation, and enhance bone
integration with implant surfaces. The large crystallite size leads
to resistance to dissolution via the decreased specific surface area
available for acid dissolution. New bioactive materials are under
development that, in general, will create a biomimetic “presence”
in vivo that induces healing superior to those of many present-day
dental materials.
Dental resins have been combined with bioactive TiO2 nanoparticles to promote hydroxyapatite formation, enhance mechanical
strength, and act photo-catalytically as a bactericidal agent. A dentin
bonding adhesive with TiO2 nanoparticles can provide on-demand,
photo-induced microbial inhibition and simultaneously fill marginal
gaps via remineralization of adjacent dentin and enamel. This technology may reduce recurrent caries, improve tissue integration with
implant surfaces, and prevent peri-implantitis or other infections at

404

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

the tissue–implant interface. These results are intriguing and highly
promising, but they have not yet been tested clinically.
The surface of materials is often what makes them bioactive. Titanium as an implant material is an example. Like chromium, titanium spontaneously reacts with oxygen to form a
self-repairing, protective oxide layer (TiO2), which makes the
implant surface largely corrosion-resistant, inert, and biocompatible. However, surface roughness and other aspects of surface
topography, together with surface chemistry, are also known
to strongly influence the early events in healing and osseointegration that follow implant placement. Interactions between
proteins, cells, tissues, and implant surfaces play a role in determining the success or failure of all implanted materials and
devices. The surface chemistry and topography-related mechanisms that control these events are poorly understood. Nevertheless, substantial research effort in dental implantology is
currently directed at developing surfaces with controlled topography and chemistry at the nanoscale level to optimally promote
protein adsorption and cell adhesion. Biomimetic calcium phosphate coatings for implants are under development to enhance
osteoconductive properties and incorporate biological agents to
accelerate bone healing in the peri-implant area. Overall, these
research efforts to understand and control surfaces are showing
great promise, and some are likely to lead to materials, processes,
and/or procedures to enhance the reliability of placement, indications for use, and the success rate of dental implants.

Antimicrobial Materials
Preventing and removing biofilms is important for pediatric dentistry and especially periodontics and endodontics. Adjunctive
liquids are needed that can quickly kill and remove bacterial colonies in biofilms during periodontal scaling. In endodontics, new
irrigants are needed to better remove and deactivate smear layers
containing remnant bacteria after root canal preparation, which is
never complete. Some endodontic irrigation liquids are combined
with acids or surfactant to dissolve the dentinal smear layer created
by endodontic instruments in a root canal. Combination devices
containing a drug, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), or amino
acids are envisioned for endodontic and periodontal uses. Two such
combinations, QMIX and MTAD (DENTSPLY Inc.), are irrigants
in endodontics.
Endodontics has been dramatically changed by the introduction of hydraulic ceramic (water-setting) cements that create highpH environments and thereby have antimicrobial properties. For
example, the tricalcium silicates and calcium aluminates have
enhanced endodontic and pulpal treatment with their antimicrobial properties and dimensional stability.
Although the clinical performance of dental resins has
improved remarkably in durability, bond strength, and esthetics,
most still lack antimicrobial properties and allow bacterial colonization and biofilm formation. Antimicrobial monomers are being
investigated and developed to prevent recurrent caries better than
composites that release fluoride ions. Ideally, the polymerized resins would have sustained antimicrobial characteristics. Examples
include modified (chlorinated) polyethylene or other polymers
that may provide antimicrobial activity.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What stages of research will lead to the adoption of new remineralizing
materials and processes for dental practice?

Remineralizing Agents and Materials
The dental literature reflects a strong demand for preventive and
“healing” therapies for individuals at moderate risk for caries to
prevent a shift to a high level of risk. Thus low concentrations of
fluoride are included in toothpaste, well water, and other fluoridated sources to have beneficial effects on enamel and dentin
remineralization.
Other remineralizing agents include the use of nanoparticles
of hydroxyapatite because they are on the same crystalline scale as
naturally occurring hydroxyapatite crystals in enamel or dentin. A
promising example of this approach was reported by Li et al. in
2008, who found that 20-nm nanohydroxyapatite particles had
a superior anticaries repair effect compared with that of larger
hydroxyapatite particles.
Liquid remineralizing dentin bonding agents, which should
wet, flow, and completely fill the demineralized zone created by
etching prior to or simultaneous with bonding to the restorative
material, are also being developed. For instance, a tricalcium silicate product was tested with polyacrylic acid and sodium tripolyphosphate for remineralization. When these materials were applied
under a restorative material, the combined material infiltrated the
demineralized collagen fibrils with precursors that restored the calcium phosphate at the interfaces of the dentin and the restorative
material. Incorporation of some of these technologies into primers and dentin bonding agents are expected to both inhibit caries
activity and increase the service life of composite restorations.
Theobromine, a bioactive agent discussed earlier, is an alternative to fluoride as a remineralization agent. Theobromine is
currently used in Theodent toothpaste products (Theodent LLC,
New Orleans).
Emerging technologies and materials that promote remineralization at early and moderately advanced stages of caries are
being developed more rapidly now that highly sensitive imaging
and measurement processes are available (Chapter 15, Diagnostic
Systems).

Bone-Grafting Materials
In addition to remineralizing small lesions, gross remineralizing
treatments and bone grafts are increasingly needed for dentistry.
Bone-grafting materials are necessary for various oral surgeries,
such as alveolar ridge augmentation and sinus augmentation, and
for the placement of implants or to improve mandibular denture
stability. Extraction socket grafting materials are gaining popularity to prevent the collapse of cortical bone and enable the placement of an implant. Also, patients prefer faster treatment and
fewer surgeries, which drives research and development toward
single-stage implant procedures with immediate functional loading (IFL). Implants with nanotechnology coatings may increase
the success and acceptability of the single-stage and IFL procedures, but before implant placement, grafts are often needed.
Graft materials are available containing allogeneic, xenogeneic,
or synthetic hydroxyapatite particles to act as a scaffold for gradual replacement by the patient’s bone. These current bone grafts
slowly resorb, and the replacement bone densifies over months
until a restorative denture or implant can be made. More rapid
resorption and bone-growth-stimulating materials are needed to
meet the demand for faster implant placement after tooth extraction, even immediate placement. Some available grafting materials
are designed for faster resorption and bone growth. For instance,
PepGen P-15 (DENTSPLY Friadent, Mannheim, Germany), a

CHAPTER 20

hydroxyapatite product with an amino acid, is available for accelerating natural bone regeneration. Infuse (Medtronic, Minneapolis,
MN), a collagen sponge with recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2), is indicated for sinus augmentation
and localized alveolar ridge augmentation. BMPs, also known as
cytokines, represent a group of growth factors that can affect cell
interactions and cell behavior. PerioGlas and NovaBone Dental Putty (NovaBone Products, Jacksonville, FL) contain coarse
(>100 μm) bioglass particles for implantation as a resorbable scaffold for bone growth and periodontal grafting. Ostim-Paste (aap
Biomaterials GmbH, Dieburg, Germany) is a nanocrystalline
hydroxyapatite paste that can be used to repair the intraoral bony
defects that may result from cystectomies (a surgical procedure to
remove a cyst), root tip resections, extractions, and surgical tooth
removal; for augmentations in the areas of the alveolar processes
and maxillary sinuses (sinus lift); and for filling periodontal defects.
Clinical trials are needed to determine the success of each of these
approaches and guide the development of future products.
New bioactive glasses are under development that contain
more boron and silica than the original formulas of 45S5 bioglass
(45 wt% SiO2 and a 5:1 ratio of CaO to P2O5) for osteogenesis, and
the new formulas may be resorbed more quickly, with faster bone
replacement. Copper or silver in these glasses may also enhance
soft tissue deposition in other applications. Powders, fibers, or
foams of the bioactive glasses may be used as scaffolds for use in
the rapid replacement of bone or soft tissue. Scaffolds of bioactive glass are used for osteoconduction, and they may also initiate
the development of cartilage (chondrogenesis). The latter could be
useful for temporomandibular joint (TMJ) treatments. Combinations of biodegradable polymers with bioactive glass particles may
also enhance tissue replacement and serve as the basis for new
grafting materials.

CRITICAL QUESTION
In which ways does the use of smart materials lead to improvements in the
quality of oral health care?

Stimulus-Responsive “Smart” Materials
“Smart” materials are designed for interaction with external stimuli, such as light, temperature change, stress, moisture, pH, or
electric/magnetic fields. Examples of such dental materials include
zirconia ceramics that transform from a tetragonal to monoclinic
crystal form when tensile stress is induced at crack tips, leading
to an increase in crystal volume and compressive stress to prevent the propagation of cracks. Light-curing composites begin
curing when irradiated with particular wavelengths of blue light,
and others change color when irradiated (for use in orthodontics).
Glass-ionomer cements will weaken when desiccated, making
orthodontic bands easier to remove. Other glass-ionomer restoratives increase the release of fluoride when the pH in plaque fluid
decreases (becomes acidic). Nickel-titanium wires are designed
to soften when chilled below body temperature for bending and
threading through orthodontic brackets. Smart cements have been
envisioned to soften and allow debonding by a temperature change
or irradiation process for the removal of orthodontic devices, indirect restoratives, and some implant components.
Secondary caries and the unnecessary replacement of defective restorations can be prevented and adjacent enamel remineralized through one of the following preservative treatments: (1)
sealing of marginal crevices adjacent to defective restorations with

Emerging Technologies

405

a hydrophilic resin, (2) sealing crevices with a smart resin capable
of the controlled release of chlorhexidine or another antibacterial
agent, (3) sealing crevices with a smart resin capable of the controlled release of fluoride, and (4) applying a sealing resin or varnish that can release xylitol or other caries-management agents at
specified concentrations over a specific period of time. Emerging
technologies and materials for sealing may include smart hydrophilic resins that release fluoride and/or other mineralizing agents
when the pH of oral fluids decreases to a range of 4.0 to 5.5 to
seal moist microscopic crevices adjacent to defective restorations
and reduce enamel demineralization. Improved, smarter sealants,
varnishes, and composites that release fluoride would be beneficial. Concomitant studies of composition, particle size, and particle-size distribution for smarter release of fluoride (on-demand
release) would make them “smart sealants.” The rapid induction
or reversal of anesthesia may be another future application for
smart materials. For instance, particles or substances applied in
the sulcus could start or stop the anesthetic reaction. Smart material concepts can provide the clinician with better control, which
will certainly suggest approaches for new products.

Self-Assembling Materials
Self-assembling materials automatically construct prespecified
assemblies. Viruses, cells, tissues, and whole organisms are examples of biological self-assemblies, whereas crystals are an example
of nonbiological self-assemblies. The latter can be derived from
polymers, metals, ceramics, or combinations of components. Selfassembly occurs by orchestrated stages of initiation, propagation,
and termination. Control systems for initiation and/or propagation may be templates (e.g., template polymerization of proteins,
patterning of silica templates for electrical circuits), or they might
depend simply on natural rules corresponding to energetically
favorable physical, chemical, mechanical, and/or biological events
(e.g., capillary forces, heterogeneous nucleation of crystallization,
surface-energy reduction, phase separation, micelle formation,
and steric probabilities for molecular folding).
Bone or soft tissue scaffolding of graft materials can be considered as self-assembling. The coarse porous particulate or spongy
bone graft materials are designed to encourage biological tissue
to respond and replace the scaffold. Templates of proteins may be
used to encourage biological events, such as specific tissue growth.
For example, a broad class of self-assembling peptide derivatives
offers exciting novel therapies of broad potential impact in regenerative medicine. These peptide amphiphiles (PAs) incorporate
a short hydrophobic domain on one end of a hydrophilic oligopeptide sequence that also contains bioactive signaling sequences.
Nanostructures can be designed from these peptides through
self-assembly strategies and supramolecular chemistry, having
the potential to combine biocompatibility with bioactivity. Such
structures offer engineering design flexibility for biomedical and
biomaterials applications. This type of research is nearing clinical application. However, for the regeneration of teeth, translation
remains a distant but achievable target. Possibilities involve tissue
engineering, biomimetics, and stem cell biology, which are discussed in greater detail in the following sections.

Self-Healing (Self-Repairing) Materials
Self-healing is an autonomically initiated response to damage or
failure. Nature continually remodels bone, which can heal itself
(self-repair) even after a major fracture. Nature’s mechanisms of

406

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

repair have inspired efforts to develop self-healing capabilities in
synthetic materials that may well appear in dental products within
a few years. To achieve self-healing, a material must be capable of
identifying and repairing failures.
Restorative materials are subject to aging in vivo and have a
limited lifetime; they gradually degrade because of physical, chemical, and biological phenomena such as creep, fatigue, internal
stresses, dissolution, erosion, or biodegradation. An epoxy system
has been developed that is self-healing, consisting of microencapsulated dicyclopentadiene and Grubb’s metathesis catalyst. If a
crack occurs in the epoxy composite, some of the microcapsules
are ruptured near the crack and release dicyclopentadiene, which
subsequently fills the crack and reacts with the catalyst, causing
polymerization of the dicyclopentadiene and repairing the crack.
These materials improve the recovery of composite fracture toughness after stress in laboratory tests. Similar systems have exhibited
a significantly longer service life under mechanical stress in situ
compared with those without the ability for self-repair. A selfhealing dental resin would be extremely important for lengthening service life.

Biological Materials
Biomaterials science is exploring new technologies and is increasingly shifting to natural tissue repair or replacement therapies.
Biological biomaterials can lead to natural tissue restoration but
rely heavily on tissue engineering, biomimetics, self-assembling
systems, cell biology, and regenerative dentistry.

Biomimetics
Some biological mechanisms and processes (e.g., protein synthesis, silk and seashell formation) can be mimicked by synthesizing
similar products by artificial mechanisms. Of particular interest
here are those that involve self-assembly of components to form,
replace, or repair oral tissues. An intriguing prospect for this
approach is the use of self-assembling PAs that contain both a
photopolymerizable group and the arginine-glycine-aspartic acidserine (RGDS) cell-adhesion sequence. The self-assembling nature
of the PAs causes the formation of networks of prealigned nanofibers, mimicking natural fibers. These nanofibers can be formed
into tissue scaffolds as substrates for mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)
cultures. Topographical patterns produced from aligned PA nanofibers were found to promote the alignment of MSCs, which indicated that the cells sensed and responded to the nanoscale features
of the scaffold surfaces. The aligned MSCs then differentiated to
form bone-like tissue.
Biomimetic technologies are under intense investigation for
translation into clinically useful materials and treatments. These
and other biomimetic approaches and the use of tissue engineering scaffolds are discussed further in the sections headed “Tissue
Engineering” and “Regenerative Dentistry.”

Tissue Engineering
Tissue engineering has emerged in the past 30 years as a multidisciplinary field recognized by the National Institutes of Health
involving biology, medicine, and engineering. Experts hope that
tissue engineering will revolutionize health care and improve quality of life for people worldwide by maintaining, restoring, and
enhancing tissue and organ repair, regeneration, and function.
The main requirements for engineered tissues are the appropriate

levels and sequencing of regulatory signals, the presence of responsive progenitor cells, an appropriate extracellular matrix or carrier
construct (i.e., scaffold), and an adequate blood supply for oxygen
and nutrients. Either biological or synthetic polymers are used to
form the tissue engineering scaffolds. Recent advances in understanding growth factors and biodegradable polymer scaffolds have
made possible the successful tissue engineering of cartilage, bone,
and related tissues. Nakashiwa and Reddi (2003) have summarized the remaining achievements required to develop the clinical
techniques needed for the creation, substitution, and/or replacement of dental tissues. Among the many potential applications
are fracture repair, dentin and periodontal ligament replacement,
alveolar ridge augmentation, temporomandibular joint reconstruction, preosseointegration of dental implants, pulp regeneration, and partial or whole tooth regeneration.
Tooth loss is the most common organ failure. The regeneration
of a tooth can include not only regrowth of the entire tooth complex as a complete biological organ but also the regeneration of
individual components, including enamel, dentin, pulp, cementum, and periodontal tissues. Two lines of investigation deal with
restoration of partial tooth damage using tooth-related stem cells
for the repair or whole-tooth regeneration by using stem cells or
tissue-engineering techniques. The first successful bioengineering
of entire tooth structures was reported in 2002 using cells from
dissociated porcine third molar tooth buds seeded on biodegradable polymer scaffolds that were implanted in rat hosts for 20 to
30 weeks.
Osteonecrosis is a new and serious dental disease that arises
from receiving bisphosphonates intravenously or orally to treat
other medical conditions. Conventional debridement is ineffective in treating osteonecrosis, so biological solutions are being
developed to treat the condition and to prevent the onset of other
dental events, such as surgeries or extractions.
Chronic periodontitis is one of the most common oral diseases
worldwide, after caries. In periodontics, tissue-engineering strategies are being developed to serve as periodontal regenerative therapies for the restoration of lost alveolar bone, periodontal ligament,
and root cementum. These strategies are based on the growth of
new functional tissue rather than replacement of the periodontium. These studies have shown that regeneration is feasible for
small to moderate-sized periodontal defects using cell-scaffold
constructs for future clinical use. Yet even though tissue engineering has created the means for predictable and optimal periodontal
tissue regeneration, routine clinical periodontal regenerative medicine and clinical use remain in an early stage.
Still greater challenges are major bone reconstruction after
trauma or cancer and augmentation following implants. Formidable challenges exist for regenerating normal bone structure and
restoring the functionality of tooth-supporting tissues. Possibilities depend on an understanding of the cellular and molecular
mechanisms involved in periodontal tissue regeneration, the differentiation potential of stem cells, and the interactions among
stem cells, scaffolds, and host tissues. Intense research and development activities in these areas indicate that placing implants may
soon be possible, even under adverse anatomical or biological
circumstances. Tissue engineering may soon lead to the reconstruction of lost bone in bone deformities more effectively and
less traumatically than the traditional autogenous bone-transplantation approach.
Predicting the full impact of tissue engineering on the future
of dentistry is difficult. However, tissue engineering brings
together advances in disparate areas of materials science, genetics,

CHAPTER 20

molecular biology, and cell biology. Researchers in these disciplines may develop new alternatives for the regeneration of soft
tissues, bone, and enamel. An important consideration will be the
cost of these procedures, at least initially. Not only is the cost of
treatment important, but the costs are significant for such projects to develop the technology, demonstrate clinical efficacy, meet
regulatory requirements, commercialize the technology, and train
clinicians in these innovative techniques.

Delivery Systems for Biologicals
Tissue-engineering approaches that combine biomaterials with
biological materials, such as proteins (growth factors, etc.),
genes, and cells (both differentiated and stem cells), are promising routes to the therapies discussed previously. Thus biological materials are a source of active, ongoing research directed in
part toward developing competent scaffolding materials capable
of fulfilling application-specific requirements for biodegradation, biocompatibility, mechanical stability, biofunctionality,
and processability. The key attributes of any biological delivery
system are controlled, sustained, and targeted release of drugs
and bioactive factors. Each of these attributes is fundamentally
dependent on the ability to predictably generate a functionalized
material.
An example of a promising biological delivery strategy is to
increase osseointegration of titanium implants by coating them
to improve healing, induce peri-implant bone formation, and
enhance osteointegration. Coatings may include extracellular
matrix components, such as collagen, BMPs, or other proteins.
Further developments are required to orchestrate the release pattern, optimize the time that the active components remain bioactive, control degradation, optimize the extracellular matrix that
forms on the implant surfaces, and achieve maximum bone formation at minimal concentrations of the biological material.
A regenerative approach for diseased or necrotic pulp tissue
includes tissue removal and replacement with healthy tissue,
including melanocortin peptides (melanocyte-stimulating hormone, α-MSH), which possess antiinflammatory properties. A
nanostructured and functionalized multilayered film containing
α-MSH was reported for endodontic regeneration. Applied as
a gel or strip, MSH films were placed adjacent to the damaged
tooth to encourage the growth and regeneration of cells. In tests
performed on cavity-filled mice teeth, researchers saw extremely
positive results; after a month, the cavities had disappeared. This
technology is in its formative stages.
Many approaches may be viable for biological materials in dentistry, but several more years will be required before a version is
available for general use in dental practice.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are engineered tooth roots more likely to have a greater impact on
dentistry than the engineered whole teeth now under development?

Regenerative Dentistry
Restorative dentistry is gradually transitioning toward biologically
driven repair, replacement, and regenerative medicine therapies
and away from replacement therapies using synthetic materials.
For tooth regeneration, the two major approaches are scaffolds
seeded with stem cells and stem cells without scaffolds. For these
approaches, the mouth has special advantages compared with

Emerging Technologies

407

other body locations, such as minimally invasive access and ease of
observation within the oral cavity.
Five dental stem cells have been isolated: (1) dental pulp stem
cells, (2) stem cells from exfoliated deciduous teeth (SHEDs), (3)
stem cells from apical papillae (SCAPs), (4) periodontal ligament
stem cells (PDLSCs), and (5) dental follicle progenitor cells. These
cells can differentiate into odontoblasts, adipocytes, neuron-like
cells, glial cells, osteoblasts, chondrocytes, melanocytes, myotubes,
and endothelial cells. Thus they will eventually be used to grow
replacement human teeth, but the signaling processes that control the development of discrete dental morphologies for incisors,
canines, premolars, and molars must be better understood before
whole-tooth regeneration will become a practical goal.
Instead, the repair and regeneration of dental tissues such as
dentin, pulp, periodontal ligaments, and whole root structures
offer possibilities for earlier realization than whole-tooth regeneration. The treatment tends toward either a cell-based or cellattraction mechanism. One example of this strategy is regenerative
endodontic treatment of infected, immature, permanent teeth
by Meschi and Lambrechts, who disinfected the root canal and
introduced stem cells, growth factors, and scaffolds. Another strategy using pulp tissue engineering and transplantation has been
applied in vitro to promote tissue regeneration. The cell-attraction
concept has been applied both in vitro and clinically and resulted
in recovery rather than regeneration of the pulp–dentin complex.
Long-term results are still lacking, and thus there is a need for
further clinical, microbial, and translational research.
Another step was taken toward regenerative endodontics
when pulp tissue was generated from the cells of human exfoliated deciduous teeth blended with nanofiber peptides as a scaffold material and injected into root canals. A similar approach
using the self-assembling PAs, discussed previously, as scaffolds
to encapsulate stem cells from deciduous teeth revealed that they
proliferate and secrete a soft collagen matrix. At this time, many
challenges remain; however, it is foreseeable that stem-cell/tissueengineering therapies will become available in the near term to
stimulate the pulp to deposit dentin and continue natural root
growth in noninfected, accidentally injured immature teeth.
Regeneration of the tooth root represents another feasible
near-term goal. This was demonstrated by transplanting a rootshaped calcium phosphate block loaded with swine SCAPs coated
with a resorbable gelatin containing PDLSCs. When this block
was placed into the extraction socket of a minipig lower incisor,
a root/periodontal structure was generated that was sufficient to
attach a ceramic crown. SCAPs are easily accessible because they
can be isolated from human third molars. The development of a
combination of SCAPs and PDLSCs encapsulated in a resorbable
scaffold offers a relatively near-term means of clinically inducing
the regeneration of a root form and connective tissue in alveolar
bone for the attachment of an artificial crown.
Both biomaterials and biological materials are playing an
indispensable role in the progress toward regeneration of a tooth
root, a crown, pulp, dentin, enamel, or an entire tooth. Repair
occurs by the use of metals, ceramics, or synthetic resin materials, whereas regeneration is controlled by biological processes.
Tooth regeneration is an extension of concepts in the broad field
of regenerative medicine to restore a tissue to its original form
and function by biological mechanisms. Although substantial
progress has been and is being made, whole-tooth regeneration
remains a distant but achievable goal—one that would cause dentistry to undergo a paradigm shift from repair and replacement
to regeneration.

408

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

CRITICAL QUESTION
In what ways do emerging diagnostic tests and processes improve the quality
of dental treatment?

Instruments and Processes
Diagnostic Devices and Techniques
As discussed in Chapter 15, Diagnostic Systems, various new and
evolving modern diagnostic techniques have been introduced for
caries, periodontal disease, oral cancer, herpes simplex infection,
and candidiasis, as well as for incipient fractures and trauma.
Promising technologies may produce images directly from the
patient or use saliva or other biological specimens from the patient
being treated. Diagnostic instruments have been based on radiographic, optical, laser fluorescence, ultrasound imaging, and electrical conductance technologies. A selected group of those that
appear to be the more promising in the near term are discussed in
the following sections.

Cone-Beam Computed Tomography
In dentistry, cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) provides
high-resolution, low-distortion, 3-D digital imaging of the hard
tissues of the head. Thus instead of pixels, the resolution is measured in voxels, and the images are often sharper than conventional CT images. The term cone-beam refers to the cone shape
of the x-ray beam used to create multiple thin slices instead of
the fan-shaped beam in conventional CT. CBCT produces Panorex and cephalometric projections, which become 3-D images
when the data are reformatted in a volume. The images that result
can be manipulated with the instrument’s visualization software
from any point of view (e.g., in the axial, coronal, sagittal, and
cross-sectional planes). Layers can be “peeled away” to show hidden underlying anatomical structures and defects. The slice thickness can be changed, and the structures can be tilted, zoomed,
and highlighted. These new views can drastically change treatment
decisions.
Swept-Source Optical Coherence Tomography
Swept-source optical coherence tomography (SS-OCT) is a
CBCT-related technology that uses infrared laser optics rather
than x-rays to generate high-resolution cross-sectional images of
microstructures in biological systems. This technology has been
under development for many years for various medical imaging
tasks, including examination of the oral cavity. Recent progress
indicates that a practical device may be available for dental applications within a few years. This nonionizing, real-time tomographic technology can detect structural flaws at a submicron scale
for dental diagnostic tasks. For example, SS-OCT may be used
to monitor the accuracy of composite restoration placement, the
development of polymerization contraction gaps, the detection of
vascular lesions, and the detection of occlusal caries.
Laser-Induced Fluorescence
Quantitative light-induced fluorescence (QLF; Inspektor Research
Systems, Amsterdam, Netherlands) is a well-advanced technology,
although it is not widely used in routine dental practice. QLF is a
simple yet effective technique that detects and quantifies de- and
remineralization of dental tissue and bacterial activity to reveal
lesions in teeth before they become frank lesions or cavities. The

QLF method is based on the autofluorescence of teeth and plaque
microorganisms. When teeth are illuminated with high-intensity
blue light, they fluoresce (re-emit) light in the green part of the
spectrum; less light correlates with less mineral content in the
enamel. Also, bacterial metabolic activity and plaque formation
can be detected because they produce porphyrin-type biological
pigments that fluoresce red light. This technique provides a measure of the degree of existing enamel demineralization via a small
video sensor. A digital image of each tooth is collected, which can
be analyzed for the amount of enamel loss. White spot lesions
(early dental caries) can be detected and quantified, as can bacterial metabolic activity on and in the teeth. When lesions are identified at an early stage, the teeth can repair themselves if good oral
hygiene practices are followed. This method also allows either the
dentist or oral hygienist to provide the patient with immediate
information and a direct incentive to monitor the quality of oral
care procedures. The newer QLF-D BiLuminator collects white
light and fluorescence images simultaneously to allow assessment of leaking restoration margins, secondary caries, occlusal
and interproximal caries, sealant integrity and cariogenic activity
under sealants, calculus, and gingivitis.

Laser Photothermal Radiometry
Laser photothermal radiometry (PTR) detects a small temperature
rise modulated by thermal infrared (black-body) radiation emitted from hard dental tissue after absorption of the laser light and
its nonradiative energy. In translucent materials such as enamel
and dentin, depth information is obtained following optical-tothermal energy conversion and transport of the incident laser
power in two modes: (1) the heat conductivity from a near-surface distance (50 to 500 μm), controlled by the thermal diffusivity of enamel and radiatively through black-body emissions from
several-millimeter depths, owing to optical penetration of the diffusely scattered laser-induced optical field; and (2) partial infrared transparency (infrared “spectral windows”) of the hard dental
tissue, which allows the thermal photons to exit the enamel and
register on the detector.
Two variations on this emerging nondestructive technology for
exploiting the opto-thermo-physical properties of teeth have been
reported. Both take advantage of the effects that changes in porosity and the crystalline status of enamel have on the thermal and
optical properties of hard tissues. As cariogenic demineralization
and formation of subsurface lesions grow, optical scattering and
absorption increase, whereas thermal conductivity and diffusivity
decrease. The two detection modalities are called infrared photothermal radiometry and modulated luminescence (PTR-LUM) and
thermo-photonic lock-in imaging (TPLI).
PTR-LUM (The Canary System, Quantum Dental Technologies, Inc., Toronto, Canada) scans a tooth with a low-power pulsating (modulated) laser light. The light is scattered, absorbed by
the tooth, and then re-emitted at a longer wavelength as luminescence, and heat is generated (<1 °C). Simultaneously, heat
(mid-infrared) and light (near-infrared) are measured to provide
information on the presence and extent of decay up to a depth of
a few millimeters below the surface.
TPLI uses a laser beam to illuminate the whole tooth and a
midinfrared camera in the lock-in mode to produce images at a
fixed frequency. TPLI is an extension of PTR into a full imaging modality. TPLI uses the same physical photothermal wave
principles as PTR: increased light scattering and absorption by a
carious lesion increase the thermal-wave amplitude and shift the
thermal-wave centroid closer to the surface, producing contrast

CHAPTER 20

between a carious lesion and intact enamel in both amplitude and
phase images. TPLI phase images are emissivity-normalized (just
as PTR phases are) and therefore are insensitive to the presence of
surface stains. Amplitude images provide integrated information
from deeper enamel regions because of the radiative contributions
that overlap conductive heat transfer. TPLI imaging is noncontacting and is reported to have a higher sensitivity to very early
demineralization than do dental radiographs.

Ultrasound Imaging
Better termed ultrasonography, this well-established medical diagnostic imaging technique has recently shown promise for highresolution imaging with enhanced specificity and sensitivity for the
early detection and monitoring of several oral pathologies. Ultrasonography is nonionizing and noninvasive, and with further development, handheld devices could become available for the detection
of cracks, calculi, and periapical lesions, in addition to enamel and
dentin demineralization caused by caries under and around existing restorations or on occlusal and interproximal surfaces.
Infrared Spectroscopy for Multiple Inflammatory
Parameters
An optical spectroscopy instrument is under development to
enhance the early detection and monitoring of peri-implant
inflammation and thereby reduce the number of implant failures.
The instrument uses visible, near-infrared spectroscopy to measure
alterations in regional tissue hemodynamics in periodontal tissue.
Tissue oxygenation at peri-implantitis sites is substantially reduced
compared with healthy sites because of increases in deoxyhemoglobin and decreases in oxyhemoglobin at the peri-implantitis
sites. To diagnose these changes, the instrument simultaneously
measures tissue oxygenation, total tissue hemoglobin, deoxyhemoglobin, oxygenated hemoglobin, and tissue edema.
Salivary Genetic Testing
Genetic testing using saliva is a molecular biology–based analytical
test particularly apropos for periodontal disease and oral cancer.
Chairside salivary sampling can be analyzed by companies such
as OralDNA Labs (Brentwood, TN) to identify patients who are
genetically susceptible to periodontal disease. This genetic testing
for the interleukin-1 (IL-1) gene cluster, a significant inflammatory mediator, complements other periodontal screening procedures and salivary bacterial DNA tests for specific oral pathogens.
Saliva analysis is used to screen for oral human papillomavirus
(HPV), especially the variants HPV-16 and HPV-18, as potential etiological agents in the development of squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Diagnostic testing will continue to
expand and enhance treatment modalities. Such tests can enhance
patients’ acceptance of treatment plans and improve their cooperation with the clinician to improve periodontal health.
Liquid-Based Cytology
Liquid-based cytology is a relatively new screening technique
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for
oral infections. It relies on the minimally invasive collection of
transepithelial mucosal cells and other microbiological aspects for
processing and evaluation. A clinician can request tests for several
generalized oral conditions, such as herpes simplex infection and
candidiasis, or suspicious areas of leukoplakia or erythroplakia
(OralCDx, CDx Laboratories, Suffern, NY). Cytology provides
the evidence needed to determine whether an immediate invasive
full-thickness biopsy procedure should be performed.

Emerging Technologies

409

Diagnostic technologies, such as CBCT, quantitative laser
fluorescence (QLF), and salivary genetic testing, are at hand and
growing. These and other techniques are expected to increase, with
positive benefits for both clinicians and patients. Each technique
varies with the mode of action and in its capability as a diagnostic
aid. Differences in presentation and behavior among anatomical
sites make it unlikely that any one diagnostic modality will have
adequate sensitivity and specificity for all circumstances. Thus a
combination of diagnostic tools will continue to be needed to reliably diagnose oral diseases and conditions and to provide corrective or preventive treatment at a stage where these treatments can
be most effective.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing
(CAD-CAM) production of dental prostheses differ from the processes
of stereolithography, robocasting, powder-bed ink-jet printing, and laser
scanning?

Computer-Driven Fabrication Systems
The present dental CAD-CAM systems vary dramatically in their
capabilities. Both copy milling and true CAD-CAM systems have
been developed. No equipment can acquire data directly in the
mouth, but intraoral sensors are used to acquire data. Not every
type of restoration can be created by CAD-CAM, although indications continue to expand. Both “additive” and “subtractive”
systems are available. Temporary crowns can be made in the lab
using either CAD or CAM systems. The additive systems use the
programmed buildup of a design from a resin that is cured “voxel
by voxel” to create the device. This requires resins that are cured
in special computer-controlled lab equipment with ultraviolet
light. Three-dimensional printing techniques have been developed for the formation of ceramic or resin composite restoratives
(see Chapter 15, Prototyping Tools). Three-dimensional printing
techniques will continue to grow and use enhanced dental materials, especially for fixed prosthodontics. The 3-D printing techniques are beginning to be used to fabricate the metal framework
of dental crowns and bridges. More advanced dental applications
include the creation of bone-graft scaffolds. Those developed to
date are summarized in Figure 20-2. See Chapter 15 for a full
discussion of these technologies.
Ceramic crowns, metal crowns, and metal superstructures
(overdenture bars) have been made using the subtractive (machining) CAD-CAM method using blocks of zirconia, leucitecontaining porcelain, filled resins, cobalt-chromium alloy, and
titanium. Refinements and esthetic improvements are expected
for all of the present systems.
Another emerging area is 3-D bioprinting. In 2019, Grigoryan
et al. demonstrated the creation of blood-vessel networks and
organ-like topologies using biocompatible hydrogels with tartrazine, a yellow food color additive projection stereolithography.
The technique involves polymerizing material using blue light,
one thin layer at a time. To make the technique work, the light
must be confined to a single layer so that it does not penetrate to
previous layers and polymerize them in off-target geometries. Tartrazine absorbs blue light selectively so that intertwined vascular
networks rapidly form in highly defined geometries.
These emerging technologies will dramatically expand the
capabilities for 3-D printing, but they will also require a different
set of dental and laboratory technical training skills.

410

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

TECHNIQUE

Stereolithography

Laser sintering

Powder-bed ink-jet
printing

MATERIALS

1 70 m

Photopolymers

45 100 m

Metals
Polymers

350 500 m

Ceramics
Metals
Polymers

200 400 m

Biopolymers
Some metals
Food

260 700 m

Thermoplastics

Laser

Laser cures
photopolymer
as platform lowers
into liquid vat.

Laser melts powder
rolled onto platform.
Platform lowers with
each layer printed.

SMALLEST
PRINTABLE
FEATURE

Laser
Roller

Roller

Printhead

Printhead sprays liquid
binder onto powder to fuse
layers. Platform lowers with
each layer printed.

Syringe

Robocasting
Syringes extrude fluid
materials that harden
on lowering platform.

Fused deposition
modeling
Heated extruder melts
plastic filament, which
cools on lowering platform.

Filament
Extruder

• Figure 20-2 The technologies available for three-dimensional printing. A variety of techniques can use
various materials to build solid objects with different resolutions. The arrows indicate the direction of roller
and platform movement. (Adapted from Butscher A, Bohner M, Hofmann S, et al: Structural and material approaches to bone tissue engineering in powder-based three-dimensional printing, Acta Biomater
7:907–920, 2011.)

Summary
This chapter has focused on technologies that are in the early stages
of implementation and those that have not yet passed the proofof-concept stage shown in the “level of evidence” section of Figure
20-1. Technologies that promote 3-D remineralization are needed
by practicing dentists whose focus is on disease prevention, minimally invasive procedures, and improved methods for extending
the survivability of restorations. Dentists, educators, and researchers will continue their search for improved technologies that
detect early stages of lesion development. Improved monitoring
of early carious lesions is essential to judge whether new methods
and materials of disease management ensure remineralization to
avoid surgical intervention. If successful, these technologies and
diagnostic methods would satisfy the “proven technologies, materials, and devices” outcome of Figure 20-1.

Several innovative methods for prosthesis construction in lab
settings have already emerged, and others are emerging. Technology improvements related to oral and maxillofacial reconstruction
methods will continue to offer pathways to improve oral health
care. Meanwhile, the search will continue for biological technologies that may allow “natural or organic” regeneration of lost or
diseased tissues.
This chapter may serve as a platform from which further
innovative technologies for oral and maxillofacial applications
can evolve with the research of materials scientists, chemists, implantologists, molecular biologists, cell biologists, and
geneticists. Sustained collaboration among researchers and clinicians is essential to expedite the development, evaluation,
and adoption of new technologies for improving oral health
outcomes.

CHAPTER 20

Selected Readings
Clough BH, Ylostalo J, Browder E, et al: Theobromine upregulates osteogenesis by human mesenchymal stem cells in vitro and accelerates
bone development in rats, Calcif Tissue Int 100:298–310, 2017.
de Josselin de Jong E, Higham SM, Smith PW, et al: Quantified lightinduced fluorescence, review of a diagnostic tool in prevention of oral
disease, J Appl Phys 105: 102031(1–7), 2009.
Devi KB, Sheela NV, Prasad BSK: Biosmart materials: A review, IOSRJDMS 18:37–41, 2019.
Fischer H: Self-repairing material systems—a dream or a reality? Nat Sci
2:873–901, 2010.
This review is an analysis of the underlying functional and constructional principles of existing natural and synthetic self-healing systems
spanning a range of classes of materials; it leads to general rules and
principles for the design of new and application-tailored self-healing
material systems.
Fugolin APP, Pfeifer CS: New resins for dental composites, J Dent Res
96:1085–1091, 2017.
Grigoryan B, Paulsen SJ, Corbett DC, et al: Multivascular networks and
functional intravascular topologies within biocompatible hydrogels,”
Science 364:458–464, 2019.
Li L, Pan H, Tao J, et al: Repair of enamel by using hydroxyapatite nanoparticles as the building blocks, J Mater Chem 18:4079–4084, 2008.
Makade C, Tekam D, Kokane V, et al: A review on integrating contemporary trends of caries diagnostic tools, Central Indian J Den Sci
7:21–27, 2016.

Emerging Technologies

411

This article reviews technologies that aid in detecting dental caries
at the earliest stages, including LED light that captures the resulting reflection and refraction of the light in the tooth, enhanced standard image processing techniques, use of three-dimensional images in
viewing internal structure, and use of infrared photon and coherent
back-scattered light techniques.
Saunders SA: Current practicality of nanotechnology in dentistry. Part
1: Focus on nanocomposite restoratives and biomimetics, Clin Cosm
Invest Dent 1:47–61, 2009.
This review discusses the current clinical utility of nanotechnology’s
most tangible contribution to dentistry to date: the restoration of
tooth structure with nanocomposites. Characterized by filler-particle sizes of less than 100 nm, these materials can offer esthetic and
strength advantages over conventional microfilled and hybrid resinbased composite (RBC) systems, primarily in terms of smoothness,
polishability and precision of shade characterization, plus flexural
strength and microhardness similar to those of the better-performing
posterior RBCs. Available comparative data for nanocomposites and
organically.
Walsh RM, Woodmansey KF, He J, et al: Histology of NeoMTA Plus and
Quick-Set2 in contact with pulp and periradicular tissues in a canine
model, J Endod 44:1389–1395, 2018.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Useful Websites (Accessed May 2020)
Library of critically appraised topics related to clinical dental problems
(https://cats.uthscsa.edu/). The “CAT” library provides key word–
searchable topics. Each topic is presented as a structured one-page
summary and critique of the best available evidence on a focused
question. The library is designed as a rapidly accessible source of evidence-based information for use in making clinical dental decisions.
The Eco-Dentistry Association: http://www.ecodentistry.org/?page=
AboutGreenDentistry.
Information about the association and resources to develop “green”
dental practices.
Dental Restorative Materials—A Pollution Prevention Perspective:
http://wsppn.org/studies/dental-chemical-use/fact-sheets/restorativematerials/.
Information regarding the health, safety, and environmental issues
arising from the chemical ingredients used in dental restorative materials.
The Canary System—A PTR-LUM Diagnostic Instrument. https://www
.dentistrytoday.com/technology/9589-improving-the-way-to-detect
-cracks-in-teeth.
Publications
Abiodun-Solanke IMF, Ajayi DM, Arigbede AO: Nanotechnology and its
Application in Dentistry, Ann Med Health Sci Res 4(Suppl 3):S171–
S177, 2014. doi:10.4103/2141-9248.141951.
Nanotechnology, or nanoscience, refers to research and development
of an applied science at the atomic or molecular level [i.e., molecular engineering, manufacturing). The growing interest in the dental
applications of nanotechnology is leading to the emergence of a new
field called nanodentistry.
Artzi Z, Kozlovsky A, Nemcovsky CE, et al: Histomorphometric evaluation of natural mineral combined with a synthetic cell-binding peptide (P-15) in critical-size defects in the rat calvaria, Int J Oral Max
Impl 23:1063–1070, 2008.
Bayne SC: Beginnings of the dental composite revolution, J Am Dent Assoc
144:880–884, 2013. DOI.org/10.14219/jada.archive.2013.0205.
Besinis A, De Peralta T, Handy RD: The antibacterial effects of silver, titanium dioxide and silica dioxide nanoparticles compared to the dental
disinfectant chlorhexidine on Streptococcus mutans using a suite of
bioassays, Nanotoxicology 8:1–16, 2014.
Chen FM, Jin Y: Periodontal tissue engineering and regeneration: Current approaches and expanding opportunities, Tissue Eng Part B Rev
16:219–255, 2009.
Chen FM, Sun H-H, Lu H, et al: Stem cell-delivery therapeutics for
periodontal tissue regeneration, Biomaterials 27:6320–6344, 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.05.048.
Clough BH, Ylostalo J, Browder E, et al: Theobromine upregulates osteogenesis by human mesenchymal stem cells in vitro and accelerates
bone development in rats, Calcif Tissue Int 100:298–310, 2017.
Darvell BW, Wu RCT: “MTA”—an hydraulic silicate cement: review
update and setting reaction, Dent Mater 27:407–422, 2011.
de Josselin de Jong E, Higham SM, Smith PW, et al: Quantified lightinduced fluorescence, review of a diagnostic tool in prevention of oral
disease, J Appl Phys 105:1–7, 2009.
Devi KB, Sheela NV, Prasad BSK: Biosmart materials: A review, IOSRJDMS 18:37–41. 2019. doi:10.9790/0853-1801093741.
Donly KJ, Gomez C: In vitro de/remineralization of enamel caries at restoration margins utilizing fluoride releasing composite resin, Quintessence Int 25:355–358, 1994.
Fan C, Chu L, Rawls HR, et al: Development of an antimicrobial resin—
a pilot study, Dent Mater 27:322–328, 2011.
Fan Y, Sun Z, Wang R, et al: Enamel inspired nanocomposite fabrication
through amelogenin supramolecular assembly, Biomaterials 28:3034–
3042, 2007.
Fioretti F, Mendoza-Palomares C, Helms M, et al: Nanostructured assemblies for dental applications, ACS Nano 4:3277–3287, 2010.

Fischer H: Self-repairing material systems—a dream or a reality? Nat Sci
2:873–901, 2010.
This review is an analysis of the underlying functional and constructional principles of existing natural and synthetic self-healing systems
spanning a range of classes of materials; it leads to general rules and
principles for the design of new and application-tailored self-healing
material systems.
Freitas RA Jr: Nanodentistry, J Am Dent Assoc 131:1559–1565, 2000.
Fugolin APP, Pfeifer CS: New resins for dental composites, J Dent Res
96:1085–1091, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022034517720658.
Galler KM, D’Souza RN, Hartgerink JD: Biomaterials and their potential applications for dental tissue engineering, J Mater Chem 20:8730–
8746, 2010.
A brief description is provided of oral anatomy and pathology, stateof-the-art treatment methods and their shortcomings, together with
an overview of current strategies to fabricate bioactive matrices, with
an emphasis on nanostructured materials. Design principles are suggested for scaffolding systems specifically tailored toward dental tissue
regeneration. Future approaches are envisioned based on the emerging
areas that rely on recent developments in tissue engineering and stem
cell research.
Garcia I, Tabak LA: A view of the future: Dentistry and oral health in
America, J Am Dent Assoc 140(Suppl 1):44S–48S, 2009.
Gelhard TB, Arends J: Microradiography of in vivo remineralized lesions
in human enamel. II, J Biol Buccale 12:59–65, 1984.
Ghorayeb SR, Bertoncini CA, Hinders MK: Dental ultrasonography,
IEEE T Ultrason FERR 55:1256–1266, 2008.
Grigoryan B, Paulsen SJ, Corbett DC, et al: Multivascular networks and
functional intravascular topologies within biocompatible hydrogels,
Science 364:458–464, 2019.
Grumezescu AM, editor: Nanobiomaterials in Dentistry: Applications of
Nanobiomaterials, Vol: 11, Cambridge, MA, 2016, William Andrew.
ISBN 978-0-323-42867-5.
This book discusses synthesis methods and novel technologies involving nanostructured bioactive materials with applications in dentistry.
This book provides current research results for dental materials science.
Hellen A, Mandelis A, Finer Y, et al: Quantitative evaluation of the kinetics of human enamel simulated caries using photothermal radiometry
and modulated luminescence, J Biomed Opt 16:1–13, 2011.
This paper evaluates PTR-LUM, an emerging nondestructive technology, for its potential use for the characterization and quantification of
early caries.
Hendricks MP, Sato K, Palmer LC, et al: Supramolecular assembly of
peptide amphiphiles, Acc Chem Res 50:2440–2448, 2017.
Hinders M, Bertoncini C, Ghoryeb S: Ultrasonographic detection of
tooth flaws, Rev Prog Quant Nondestr Eval 29:1559–1565, 2010.
Hollister SJ, Murphy WL: Scaffold translation: Barriers between concept
and clinic, Tissue Eng Part B Rev 17:459–474, 2011.
This article reviews the technical, business, and philosophical barriers
to the translation of scaffold-based bone tissue engineering therapies
to clinical use. Enabling translation to clinical application requires
both understanding the challenges and addressing the complete range
of these challenges. Engineering scaffold designs as modular systems with a sliding scale of complexity is envisioned as an achievable
approach for addressing the translational challenges.
Holten-Andersen N, Harrington MJ, Birkedal H, et al: PH-induced
metal-ligand cross-links inspired by mussel yield self-healing polymer
networks with near-covalent elastic moduli, PNAS 108:2651–2655,
2011.
Huang G, Yamaza T, Shea LD: Stem/progenitor cell-mediated de
novo regeneration of dental pulp with newly deposited continuous
layer of dentin in an in vivo model, Tissue Eng Part A 16:605–615,
2009.
Hubbell JA: Materials as morphogenetic guides in tissue engineering,
Curr Opin Biotechnol 14:551–558, 2003.
Keller L, Offner D, Schwinté P, et al: Active nanomaterials to meet the
challenge of dental pulp regeneration, Materials 8:7461–7471, 2015.
400.e1

Jandt KD, Sigusch BW: Future perspectives of resin-based dental materials, Dent Mater 25:1001–1006, 2009.
This outlook paper gives a view of selected potential future developments in the area of resin-based biomaterials with an emphasis on
dental composites. A discussion of potential developments provides
insights into future performance and application possibilities for these
materials.
Jefferies SR, Pameijer CH, Appleby DC, et al: Prospective observation of
a new bioactive luting cement: 2-Year follow-up, J Prosthodon 21:33–
41, 2012.
Jones AS, Rule JD, Moore JS, et al: Life extension of self-healing polymers with rapidly growing fatigue cracks, J R Soc Interface 4:395–403,
2007.
Ko H-Y, Kang S-M, Kim HE, et al: Validation of quantitative lightinduced fluorescence-digital (QLF-D) for the detection of approximal
caries in vitro, J Dent 45:568–575, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.jdent.2015.02.010.
Le Guéhennec L, Soueidan A, Layrolle P: Surface treatments of titanium
dental implants for rapid osseointegration, Dent Mater 23:844–854,
2007.
Li L, Pan H, Tao J, et al: Repair of enamel by using hydroxyapatite
nanoparticles as the building blocks, J Mater Chem 18:4079–4084,
2008.
Lippert F, Parker DM, Jandt KD: In situ remineralisation of surface softened human enamel studied with AFM nanoindentation, Surf Sci
553:105–114, 2004.
Liu Y, Ramanath HS, Wang DA: Tendon tissue engineering using scaffold enhancing strategies, Trends Biotechnol 26:201–209, 2008.
Kasraei S, Shokri A, Poorolajal J, et al: Comparison of cone-beam computed tomography and intraoral radiography in detection of recurrent caries under composite restorations, Braz Dent J 28:85–91, 2017.
https://doi.org/10.1590/0103-6440201701248.
Makade C, Tekam D, Kokane V, et al: A review on integrating contemporary trends of caries diagnostic tools, Central Indian J Den Sci
7:21–27, 2016.
This article reviews technologies that aid in detecting dental caries
at the earliest stages, including LED light that captures the resulting reflection and refraction of the light in the tooth, enhanced standard image processing techniques, use of three-dimensional images in
viewing internal structure, and use of infrared photon and coherent
back-scattered light techniques.
McCabe JF, Yan Z, Al Naimi OT, et al: Smart materials in dentistry—
future prospects, Dent Mater J 28:37–43, 2009.
Smart materials have properties that can be altered in a controlled
fashion by, for example, stress, temperature, moisture, pH, and electric
or magnetic fields. A key feature of smart behavior includes an ability
to return to the original state after the stimulus has been removed.
McGlennen RC: Salivary diagnostics: A catalyst for medical/dental collaboration, Comp Cont Educ Dent 32:96, 2011.
Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Curtis JW, Ergle JW, et al: Ultraconservative and
cariostatic sealed restorations: Results at year 10, J Am Dent Assoc
129:55–66, 1998.
A classic study that demonstrated how effectively a sealing resin can
penetrate defective margin gaps between either amalgam or composite
restorations placed over carious dentin and prevent the progression of
lesions.
Nakahara T, Ide Y: Tooth regeneration: Implications for the use of bioengineered organs in first-wave organ replacement, Hum Cell 20:63–70,
2007.
Nakashiwa M, Reddi H: The application of bone morphogenic proteins
to dental tissue engineering, Nature Biotech 21:1025–1032, 2003.
An overview of the current and potential uses of tissue engineering in
dentistry and the role of bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs).
Nogueira-Filho G, Xiang XM, Shibli JA, et al: On site noninvasive assessment of peri-implant inflammation by optical spectroscopy, J Periodont Res 46:382–388, 2011.
Nör JE: Tooth regeneration in operative dentistry, Oper Dent 31:633–
642, 2006.
400.e2

Oei JD, Zhao WW, Chu L, et al: Antimicrobial acrylic materials with
in situ generated silver nanoparticles, J Biomed Mater Res Part B
100B:409–415, 2012.
Resin biomaterials are described that can help prevent such problems
as secondary caries and implant infections.
Otis LL, Everett MJ, Sathyam US, et al: Optical coherence tomography:
A new imaging technology for dentistry, J Am Dent Assoc 131:511–
514, 2000.
Padhye A, Ungewiss C, Fradette JJ, et al: A novel ex vivo tumor system
identifies SRC-mediated invasion and metastasis in mesenchymal
tumor cells in non-small cell lung cancer, Sci Rep 9:1–13, 2019.
Padovani GC, Feitosa VP, Sauro S, et al: Advances in dental materials
through nanotechnology: Facts, perspectives and toxicological aspects,
Trends Biotechno 33:621–636, 2015.
Palmer LC, Newcomb CJ, Kaltz SR, et al: Biomimetic systems for
hydroxyapatite mineralization inspired by bone and enamel, Chem
Rev 108:4754–4783, 2008.
Park CH, Rios HF, Jin Q, et al: Biomimetic hybrid scaffolds for engineering human tooth–ligament interfaces, Biomaterials 31:5945–5952,
2010.
Park YS, Ahn JS, Kwon HB, et al: Current status of dental caries diagnosis
using cone beam computed tomography, Imaging Sci Dent 41(2):43–
51, 2011. https://doi.org/10.5624/isd.2011.41.2.43.
Petrovic LM, Drobac MR, Stojanac IL, et al: A method of improving
marginal adaptation by elimination of singular stress point in composite restorations during resin photo-polymerization, Dent Mater
26:449–455, 2010.
Petrovic V, Stefanovic V: Dental tissue—new source for stem cells, Sci
World J 9:1167–1177, 2009.
A review focusing on recent findings in the field of dental stem cell
research and the potential for their therapeutic use.
Pramanik C, Wang T, Ghoshal S, et al: Microfibrous borate bioactive
glass dressing sequesters bone-bound bisphosphonate in the presence
of simulated body fluid, J Mater Chem B 3:959–963, 2015.
Qi Y-P, Li N, Niu L-N, et al: Remineralization of artificial dentinal caries
lesions by biomimetically modified mineral trioxide aggregate, Acta
Biomater 8:836–842, 2012.
Rhienmora P, Haddawy P, Suebnukarn S, et al: Intelligent dental training
simulator with objective skill assessment and feedback, Artif Intell Med
52:115–121, 2011. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.artmed.2011.04.003.
A virtual reality dental training simulator is described together with
methods for providing objective skill assessment and feedback. The
simulator uses force feedback and can classify a particular operator
as novice-level or expert-level and generate.
Rosa V, Della Bona A, Cavalcanti BN, et al: Tissue engineering: From
research to dental clinics, Dent Mater 28:341–348, 2012. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2011.11.025.
This review presents the principles underlying tissue engineering and
the current challenges, perspectives, trends, and future applications of
tissue engineering in dentistry.
Rugh JD, Hendricson WD, Glass BJ: Teaching evidence-based practice
at the University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio Dental
School, Tex Dent J 128:187–190, 2011.
The previous two articles describe the development and use of an
online library of critically appraised topics, or “CATs,” that present one-page summaries and critiques of the best available evidence
on focused clinical questions. It provides an immediately available
source for making evidence-based clinical dental decisions (http://cats
.uthscsa.edu/).
Rugh JD, Hendricson WD, Hatch JP, et al: The San Antonio CATs initiative, J Am Coll Dent 77:16–21, 2010.
Saunders SA: Current practicality of nanotechnology in dentistry. Part
1: Focus on nanocomposite restoratives and biomimetics, Clin Cosm
Invest Dent 1:47–61, 2009.
This review discusses the current clinical utility of nanotechnology’s
most tangible contribution to dentistry to date: The restoration of
tooth structure with nanocomposites. Characterized by filler-particle
sizes of less than 100 nm, these materials can offer esthetic and

strength advantages over conventional microfilled and hybrid resinbased composite (RBC) systems, primarily in terms of smoothness,
polishability, and precision of shade characterization, plus flexural
strength and microhardness similar to those of the better-performing
posterior RBCs. Available comparative data for nanocomposites and
organically.
Scheifele C, Schmidt-Westhausen A-M, Dietrich T, et al: The sensitivity
and specificity of the OralCDx technique: Evaluation of 103 cases,
Oral Oncol 40:824–828, 2004.
Seeman NC: Nanotechnology and the double helix, Sci Am 290:92–99,
2004.
Shimada Y, Sadr A, Burrow MF, et al: Validation of swept-source optical
coherence tomography (SS-OCT) for the diagnosis of occlusal caries,
J Dent 38:655–665, 2010.
Slavkin HC, Bartold PM: Challenges and potential in tissue engineering,
Periodontol 41:9–15, 2006.
Sloan AJ, Smith AJ: Stem cells and the dental pulp: Potential roles in
dentine regeneration and repair, Oral Dis 13:151–157, 2007.
This article explores tissue engineering alternatives for pulp-capping
and root canal treatment using dental pulp progenitor/stem cells,
morphogens, and biomaterial scaffolds. The potential of this approach
as a clinical therapy is discussed and shown to require close control of
the regenerative process, because uncontrolled regeneration can inadvertently lead to pulp obliteration and loss of tooth vitality.
Sonoyama W, Liu Y, Fang D, et al: Mesenchymal stem cell-mediated
functional tooth regeneration in swine, PLoS One 1:1–8, 2006.
Steinkeller MD, Salzman N, Weiss EI: In-vivo performance of antibacterial flowable composite, IADR, 2019 Abst.0507.
Subramani K, Ahmed W: Emerging Nanotechnologies in Dentistry, St.
Louis, MO, 2012, Elsevier.
This book brings together an international team of experts from the
fields of nanomaterials, biomedical engineering, and dentistry to cover
the new materials and techniques with potential for intra- or extraoral
use in the restoration, fixation, replacement, or regeneration of hard
and soft tissues in and about the oral cavity and craniofacial region.
New dental nanotechnologies include the use of advanced inorganic
and organic materials, smart and biomimetic materials, tissue engineering, and drug delivery strategies.
Tabatabaei N, Mandelis A, Amaechi BT: Thermophotonic lock-in
imaging of early demineralized and carious lesions in human teeth,
J Biomed Opt 16:071402, 2011.
A novel dental-imaging modality, thermophotonic lock-in imaging
(TPLI), is described that uses photothermal wave technology and is
capable of detecting early carious lesions and cracks on occlusal and
approximal surfaces.
Tayalia P, Mooney DJ: Controlled growth factor delivery for tissue engineering, Adv Mater 21:3269–3285, 2009.
ten Cate JM, van Duinen RN: Hypermineralization of dentinal lesions
adjacent to glass-ionomer cement restorations, J Dent Res 74:1266–
1271, 1995.

Vorndran E, Klammert U, Ewald A, et al: Simultaneous immobilization
of bioactives during 3D powder printing of bioceramic drug-release
matrices, Adv Funct Mater 20:1585–1591, 2010.
The combination of a degradable bioceramic scaffold and a drug delivery system in a single low temperature fabrication step is described
for the reconstruction of bone defects. The production of calcium
phosphate scaffolds by a multijet 3D printing system enables localized deposition of biologically active drugs and proteins with a spatial
resolution of approximately 300 μm.
Walsh RM, Woodmansey KF, He J, et al: Histology of NeoMTA Plus and
Quick-Set2 in contact with pulp and periradicular tissues in a canine
model, J Endod 44:1389–1395, 2018.
Webber MJ, Kessler JA, Stupp SI: Emerging peptide nanomedicine to
regenerate tissues and organs, J Intern Med 267:71–88, 2010. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2009.02184/x.
The authors review their work on peptide nanostructures containing
bioactive signals. These amphiphilic molecules are designed to selfassemble into biocompatible, bioactive biomaterials with the potential
for use as novel therapies in a wide variety of regenerative medicine
applications, including the repair of bone, dentin, and enamel and the
regeneration of whole teeth.
Welch K, Cai Y, Engqvist H, et al: Dental adhesives with bioactive and
on-demand bactericidal properties, Dent Mater 26:491–499, 2010.
ISSN 0109-5641, doi:10.1016/j.dental.2010.01.008.
Wolf LF: Personal manufacturing, Chem Eng News 89:10–14, 2010.
A review of CAD/CAM technologies and how they are being used for
on-demand manufacturing of everything from medical devices such
as those used in dentistry to food and consumer products.
Yildirim S, Fu SY, Kim K, et al: Tooth regeneration: A revolution in
stomatology and evolution in regenerative medicine, Int J Oral Sci
3:107–116, 2011.
This review article explores existing and visionary approaches to tooth
regeneration that represent a paradigm shift from repair by synthetic
materials to regeneration by biological restoration to restore original
form and function by biological substitutes.
Young CS, Terada S, Vacanti JP, et al: Tissue engineering of complex
tooth structures on biodegradable polymer scaffolds, J Dent Res
81:695–700, 2002.
Yuan ZL, Nie HM, Wang S, et al: Biomaterial selection for tooth regeneration, Tissue Eng B-Rev 17:373–388, 2011.
A critical review of current knowledge of biomaterial use in tooth
regeneration is presented. The selection of native and/or synthetic
polymers, three-dimensional scaffold fabrication, stem cell transplantation, and stem cell homing is discussed.
Zivkovic P, Petrovic V, Najman S, et al: Stem cell–based dental tissue
engineering, Sci World J: TSW Dev Embryol 10:901–916, 2010.
This review focuses on the use of tissue engineering strategies in tooth
regeneration using stem cells and stem cells/scaffold constructs. The
authors point out that although whole tooth regeneration is still not
possible, there are promising results.

400.e3

Index
Page numbers followed by “f ” indicate figures, “t” indicate tables, and “b” indicate boxes.
A
Abfraction, 7
Abrasion, 7, 334, 334f
air-particle, 344, 348–349
three-body, 334f
two-body, 334f
Abrasive
blinding, 342
bonded, 340–341
coated discs and strips, 342f
definition, 332
hardness values, 339t
instruments, 42, 338
design, 341
metal bonds, 342
modes of wear, 334f
motion, 335
nonbonded, 343
partial denture framework casting, 333f
particle sizes, 339t
pastes, 344
procedures and instruments, 333f
process, 333
resinoid-bonded, 342
types, 333f, 340
Abrasive wear
factors influencing, 81
three-body, 81
two-body, 81
Abrasiveness, dentifrices, 351
Absorption, 53
definition, 49
Abutment screw, 269
Abutment–prosthesis interfaces, 137f
Accelerated lifetime testing (ALT)
constant-stress/step-stress accelerated
lifetime testing (CSALT/SSALT), 383
definition, 381
lifetime predictions, 383
performance of dental materials, 383
regression model, 383f
stressor, 383
Acceleration, 4
Accelerator, 277
Acceptability, clinical analysis, 392
Acceptability threshold (AT), 54
Accuracy, 381, 384
Acetylene, heat source, 186
Acid–base reaction, 128
Acid-etch technique, 116
Acid-etching
dentin, 117
discovery, 115
enamel, 117
Acidulated phosphate fluoride (APF) gels, 203
usage, 134

Acrylic resins, 88, 233, 234f
ACTIVA BioACTIVE, 104
Activation, 87
Activator, definition, 87
ADA Specifications and Acceptance Program,
387
Addition polymerization, 39
chain transfer, 40, 41f
inhibition, 40
unsaturated functional groups, 39f
vinyl monomers, 39
Addition polymers, 38
Addition silicone, 277, 278f
advantage, 278
composition, 289
contamination, 277
polymerization, 277, 278f
Addition-fragmentation monomer (AFM),
403
Additive manufacturing (AM), 328
definition, 326
fused deposition modeling, 330
materials, 330
stereolithography, 330
Additives, 300
Adherend, 43
definition, 15
Adhesion, 42, 115
definition, 15
mechanisms, 116
Adhesive bonding, 47
Adhesive wear, 80
Adhesives, 43, 121
classification, 122f
definition, 15
etch-and-rinse, 123
self-etch, 123
Adjacent teeth (restoration), endosteal blade
implant designs (usage), 256f
Adverse effects of material, 355–356. See also
Allergies; Local effects;
Systemic effects
Aerosols, 338
Agar
composition, 289
gelation, 289
impression making, 289, 289f
sol–gel transformation, 287
Age-hardening, 176
definition, 171
heat treatment, 32
Air pockets, formation, 47f
Air-particle abrasion, 332, 344, 348
Alginate impression material
composition, 290
compressive strength, 292, 298t

Alginate impression material (Continued)
gelation process, 290
impression making, 292
powder composition, 293t
preparation, 291
setting time, 291, 291f
shelf life, 292
sodium, 291f
strength, 292
Alginate substitutes, 278
All-ceramic crowns
aesthetics, 228
strengthening, thermal expansion
mismatch, 225
stress concentrations, 223
All-ceramic prostheses
contraindications, 228
fractography, 398
fracture, factors associated, 398
All-ceramic restorations
aesthetic appearance, 228
fracture susceptibility, 226
All-ceramic systems, 206, 213, 214t
pressable core ceramics/veneering ceramics,
214t
veneering ceramic for, 218t
Allergic reactions
inflammatory response, 361, 362f
prosthetic polymers and resins, 248
Allergies
allergens, 360–361
concept, 356
contact dermatitis, 364
definition, 355
dental alloys
cobalt, 375
gold, 375
immunotoxicity of metal, 375
nickel allergy, 374
Ni-Pd cross-reactivity, 375
palladium allergy, 375
patch tests, 374
symptoms, 375
titanium and titanium alloys, 375
dental amalgams, 166, 371
frequencies, 360–361
Gell and Coombs classification, 360
hand dermatitis, 360
immunotoxicity, 362–363, 363f
inflammation, 361, 362f
methacrylates and resin composites, 373
natural rubber latex (NRL), 377
occupational hazards, 364
occurrence, 360
patch test, 362f, 362
respiratory problems, 364
413

414

Index

Allergies (Continued)
sensitization, 361
sites for reactions, 360f, 360
symptoms, 361f, 361
types, 360
All-metal prostheses
alloys, 174
base-metal, 176
gold-based alloys, 175
gold-copper alloys, 175
high-noble alloys, 175
composition, 175
noble alloys, 175
composition, 175
silver-palladium alloys, 176
titanium alloys, 176
Alloplastic, 253
definition, 253
Alloys, 15, 23
composition
copper percentage, 31
percent by weight, 264t
definition, 15
dental applications classification, 174,
174t
ductility, 173
elastic modulus, 172
eutectic alloys, 30
fatigue resistance, 173
gold-based, 175
gold-copper, 32f
hardness, 173
high palladium content, 33
mechanical properties, 172
classification, 174
noble metal content classification, 173,
173t
peritectic, 31
principal elements classification, 174
stainless steel, 194
temperature decrease, 29
Alpha-hemihydrate, 295
Alpha-omega-hydroxyl-terminated
poly-dimethyl siloxane, 277, 278f
Alpha-titanium alloys (deformation), twinning
(significance), 191
Alumina
core ceramic, 219
glass formation, 208
physical properties, 219t
Alumina core
ceramic, 219
dental, 219
Aluminosilicate, 328
Aluminous porcelain crowns, 206
Aluminum oxide, 111, 340
Amalgam, 153,
allergies, 371
biocompatibility, 371f, 370–372
bonding, 126
creep, 51
in dentistry, 42
environmental mercury exposure, 372
local reactions, 371f, 371
mercury handling, 372
mercury poisoning symptoms, 370
mercury release, 370
systemic reactions, 371

Amalgam alloy. See also Dental amalgams
amalgamation. See Amalgamation
bonding, 126
composition
commercial alloys, 154t
equilibrium-phase diagram, 155f
gallium-based alloys, 155
high-copper alloy, 155
low-copper alloys, 154
silver-tin system, 154, 155f
dental amalgam, 153
direct restoration, 8
disadvantages, 88
particle shapes, 153, 154f
powder configuration
atomized powder, 155
lathe-cut powder, 155
particle sizes, 155
vs. spherical powder, 155
programmable triturator, 153, 154f
restorations, 109f, 136
separators, 363
trituration capsules, 153, 154f
Amalgam tattoo, 371f, 371
Amalgamation
amalgam, 153
definition, 153
high-copper alloys
admixed alloys, 157
single-composition alloys, 157, 158f
low-copper alloys
development sequence, 156f, 156
microstructure features, 156, 157f
physical properties, 156
reaction products, 155, 156f
reaction process, 153
American National Standards Institute
(ANSI), 387
ADA Specification No. 96 (ISO 9917-1),
137
American National Standards Institute
(ANSI)/American Dental Association
(ADA) Specification No. 41, 364
American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM) F 67 unalloyed titanium,
tensile properties/impurity limits, 177t
Amorphous silica, 90, 97
Amorphous structure
atom, 20
polymers, 36
Animal tests, 366
Ankylosis, 253, 257
Annealing, 193
definition, 171
Anode, 59
Anodic/oxidation reaction, 59
Anodization, 262
Anterior teeth
active carious lesions, 7f
misaligned lower, 7f
wax-up, 10f
Antiflux, 185
definition, 171
Antimicrobial materials, 404
Apparent surface area, 80
Aqueous-based cements, 138
Argon gas atmosphere, laser welding, 188
Arkansas stone, 340

Aromatic urethane dimethacrylate (AUDMA),
403
Artificial implant designs/material, 254
As-cast Cu-Ag alloy, cored structure, 30
Asperities, 80
Asperity junctions, 80
Astropol finishing/polishing system, 344
Atomic model, 68f
Atoms, 16
interaction, 17, 17f
size difference, 28
Atraumatic restorative treatment (ART), 144
definition, 128
Atrophic mandibles (accommodation),
Branemark hybrid prosthesis (usage),
269
Attractive force, 17
Attrition, 7
Augmented reality (AR), 331
definition, 326
Austenite, 194
Austenitic stainless steels, 195
corrosion resistance, 195
mechanical properties, 195
Autoglazed veneer ceramic, 209f
Auxiliary dental material, 10
definition, 3, 276
B
Ba glass fillers, 90
Backbone, 34
Back-pressure porosity, 322, 323f
Ball-and-stick model, 20f
Base metal alloys, 181
definition, 171
hardness/strength, 181
manipulation, 181
mechanical properties, 182
removable partial dentures, alloys, 183
solidification shrinkage, 181
Base metals
all-metal prosthesis usage, 176
dental alloys, 176
Base paste (base putty), 275, 277
Baseplate wax, 275, 302–303
Benzoyl peroxide (BPO)
activation, 39f
Beta-hemihydrate, 295
Beta-titanium alloys, 199
Beta-titanium wires
composition, 199
corrosion resistance, 200
mechanical properties, 199
surface property, 200
welding, 199
Bezold–Brucke effect, 55
Biaxial flexural strength, 74
Binary alloys, 33
Bioacceptance, definition, 253
Bioactive, 401
definition, 253, 401
Bioactive cements, components, 149
Bioactive composites, 104
Bioactive glass, 405
Bioactive materials, 257, 355–356, 403
Bioactivity, 129, 265, 403
definition, 128
Bioceramics, 135

Index

Biocompatibility, 262
adverse effects of material, 356
allergies
concept, 356
frequencies, 360–361
Gell and Coombs classification, 360
immunotoxicity, 362–363, 363f
inflammation, 361, 362f
patch test, 362f, 362
sites for reactions, 360f, 360
symptoms, 361f, 361
types, 360
alloys, 172
basic concept, 356f, 356
bioactive materials/smart materials, 356
composites, 110
definition, 355
dental materials-tissues interaction, 356f, 356
effect on the environment/chemical waste,
363
legal regulations
Dental Products Panel (DPP) of the
FDA Medical Devices Advisory
Committee, 368
postmarket surveillance, 368
risk classes, 368
local effects
bone–implant interface, 360
concept, 356, 357f
foreign substances entry, 358f, 358
inflammatory response, 357f
microleakage, 359f, 359
nanoleakage, 359f, 359–360
periodontium, 359f, 359
pulp tissue, 358
tooth–restoration interfaces, 359f, 359–360
material selection guidelines
anamnesis (Patient’s Account of Medical
History), 379
intended use and indications for
materials, 378
main components of the material, 378
risk communication, 374f, 379
risks vs. benefits of dental materials, 378
safety and performance of material, 378,
379t
treatment planning, 379
occupational hazards for dental personnel,
363–364
patient reports and complaints of adverse
effects, 377–378
risk, 355–357
safety, 355–356
side effect of various material groups
dental alloys, 373–375
dental amalgam, 371f, 370–372
dental ceramics, 376
glass-ionomer cements, 376–377
hydrofluoric acid (HF), 376
methacrylates and resin composites,
372–373
natural rubber latex (NRL), 377
systemic effects
CMR effects, 358
concept, 357f, 356
estrogenicity, 358
variables, 358
toxic substances into body, 357

Biocompatibility test
animal tests, 366
dose–response relationship of toxicity, 365f,
365
extracts, 366
labeling, 368, 369f
purpose, 364
release of substances from materials, 364
requirements, 365
responsibilities, 367
Safety Data Sheet (SDS), 368
standards, 367–368
strategy, 366, 367f
usage tests, 366
in vitro tests, 366
Biocorrosion, 7, 8f
Bioglasses, bioactive ceramic biomaterials, 265
Bioinductive, definition, 401
Biointegration, 355, 360
Glossary of Prosthodontic Terms definition,
265
Biological delivery strategy, 407
Biological issue, teeth, 6
Biomaterials, 401
biocompatibility, 267
biomimetics, 406
de Condue, Albucasis, 254
definition, 401
delivery systems, 407
nanotechnology, 402
research/development/applications, 254
tissue engineering, 406
Biomechanics, 269
Biomimetics, 402, 406
definition, 401
Biosilicates, 135
Bisco Aelite LS, 102
Bismuth oxide, 139
Bisphenol A (BPA), 358, 372
Bisphenol A glycidyl methacrylate (bis-GMA),
89
Bisphenol-A glycidyl dimethacrylate
(bis-BAD), 88
chemical structure, 89f
Bite wax, 275, 303
Blacklights, 56
Blade implants, 254, 255f
Bleaches, 250
Bleeding process, 281
Block copolymer, 35
Body-centered cubic (BCC) cell, 20
Bond distance, 17, 17f
Bond energy, 17
Bond failure, metal-ceramic prosthesis, 211f
Bond strength
aging tests, 123
measurement, 122
metal-ceramic prosthesis, 212
orthodontic brackets, 125
self-adhesive cements, 125
Bonded abrasives, 340–341, 342f
definition, 332
Bonding, 16, 42
agents, 118, 122
amalgam, 126
applications, 124
definition, 15
drying stage, 118

415

Bonding (Continued)
etching time, 118
factors, 118
historical background, 115
primary bonds, 18
process/procedural factors, 117
resin, dental ceramics, 219
rinsing stage, 118
surfaces
cleanliness, 118
treatments, 125
Bonding systems, 149
resin cements, 145
Bone
biomechanical stress/strain, 269
blade implants, embedding, 255f
endosteal implant, placement, 256f
integration, 269
qualities, 267f
Bone-grafting materials, 404
Bone–implant interface, 360
Boric oxide, 208
Boxing wax, 275, 302–303
Braces, ceramic/metal-base orthodontic, 7f
Brackets, 6
Branched copolymer, 15, 36
Branched polymers, 35f
Branemark hybrid prosthesis (usage), 270f
Brass, grain size and appearance, 192f
Brazing, 171
Brinell hardness number, 78
Brinell hardness test, 78
Brittle, definition, 64
Brittleness, 72
Brushes and abrasive cleansers, 250
Bruxism, 7
Buffing, 337
definition, 332
Bulk reduction
definition, 332
Bulk-fill composites, 101
Burnished foil, sintering, 184
Burnout, 306
Burs, tungsten-carbide, 111
C
Calcination, gypsum, 295f, 295
Calcium aluminate glass-ionomer cement,
148, 151
Calcium hydroxide
insulating abilities, 135
liners, usage, 135
reaction, 135
Calcium phosphates
cements, 151, 403
definition, 128
coating biomaterial usage, 265
Calcium silicate, 135
powder, 403
Calcium sulfate dihydrate, 290
Camphorquinone (CQ), 94
CamX Spectra Caries Detection system,
331
Canal sealers, 132
Candelilla wax, 302
Cantilever beam
bending, 194f
elastic deflection, 193

416

Index

Captek crowns
advantage, 184
usage, 184
Carbon steels, 194
Carcinogenicity, 355, 366
Caries, quantitative light-induced
fluorescence, 330
Carnauba wax, 302
Carving, 160f, 159–160
Case-control studies, 392
definition, 390
Cast metals
liquid-to-solid transformation, 25
margin, burnishing, 71
surface quality, 312
Cast structure, homogenization, 30
Castability, 174
Casting
air voids, 321
crucibles, 318
defective, 321
definition, 306
direct-current arc melting machine, 318
discolorations and roughness, 324
distortion, 321
electrical resistance-heated casting machine,
317
foreign bodies, 321
gypsum investments, 315
high-heat thermal expansion technique,
315
hygroscopic low-heat technique, 315
incomplete, 323
induction melting machine, 318, 318f
liquid/powder ratio, 321
machines, 317
mold wall, molten alloy (impact), 321
pattern position, 322
phosphate investments, 316
porosity, 322
procedure, 314
shrinkage, 309
surface roughness, 321
time allowable, 317
torch melting/centrifugal casting machine,
317
water films, 321
wax elimination and heating, 314
Casting alloys
classification, 173
linear solidification shrinkage, 184t
melting range, 172
Casting fit
clinical evaluation, 320
discrepancies, detection, 320
Casting ring, 307f
liner, 313
expansion, ensuring, 314f
Casting waxes, 303
Casting-machine spring, 317
Catalyst, 277
Catalyst paste, 277
definition, 275
Cathode, 59
Cavitation-erosion wear, 81
Cavities
lining material, formulas, 134–135
varnishes, 135

Cavity liners, 135
definition, 128
Cement base, 136
definition, 128
thermal conductivity, 136t
Cementing
definition, 115
mechanics, 138f
Cements, 129
affixing devices, 152t
combination, 147
definition, 115, 128
disintegration, 131
durability, 132
fluid-to-solid transformation, 50
for luting, 137
properties, 152t
sealers, 125
solubility, 131
thickness, 138
definition, 128
prosthesis retention, 138
Cementum, 5
Central incisor metal-ceramic crowns,
porcelain margins, 56f
Centrifugal casting machine, spring-wound,
317f
Ceramco porcelain, 206
Ceramic bracket bases, 146
Ceramic FDPs, performance, 258
Ceramic implants
materials, mechanical properties/density,
259t
tensile/shear stresses, induction, 265
Ceramic powders, 42
Ceramic products identification, 231
Ceramic prostheses
fracture resistance, 226
resin cements, 146
Ceramic restorations
classification, 398
polycrystalline, 146
Ceramic steel, 216
Ceramic-ceramic systems, 213
Ceramic-like coated implant systems, 265
Ceramic/metal-base orthodontic braces, 7f
Ceramics, 16, 33
abrasiveness, 204
aesthetic qualities, 205
autoglazed veneer ceramic, 209f
biological properties, 204
CAD-CAM processing, 220
castable, 202, 213
color-matching ability, 205
compositions, 208t
conductivity, 205
core, 202
corrosion, 59
definition, 15, 202
dental, 202
glass modifiers, 208
glass-infiltrated core, 218
glassy phases, 33
glaze, 202, 209
hot-pressed (pressable ceramic), 202
indications and contraindications, 222t
indirect restoration, 9
mechanical properties, 34, 203

Ceramics (Continued)
physical properties, 205
slow crack growth, 208
stain, 202, 209
static fatigue or delayed failure, 77
strengthening, methods, 222
structure, 33, 223
types, 207
zirconia-based, 214
Ceramming, 213
Cercon zirconia core ceramic, 221f, 221
finished fixed dental prosthesis framework,
221f
green state ceramic milling, 221f
Ceresin, 302
Ceria, 216
Cerpress SL Pressable Ceramic System
(leucite-based product), 213
Chain-growth polymerization, 38–39,
39f
unsaturated functional groups, 39f
Chairside salivary sampling, 409
Chalk, 340
Change of state, 16
Charpy-type impact tester, 74
Chemical bonding mechanisms, 120f
Chemical corrosion, 59
Chemical inertness, 203
dental restoration characteristic, 203
Chemical polymerization, 8
Chemical properties, 50
Chemical waste, 363
Chemical-activated denture base resins
fluid-resin technique, 241–242, 242f
vs. heat-activated denture, 241
processing considerations, 241
technical considerations, 241
tertiary amine, 241
Chemical-activated resin, 93
advantages and disadvantages, 94
definition, 87
Chemisorption, 44
Chlorinated polyethylene (CPE), 252
Chondrogenesis, 405
Chroma
definition, 49, 54
Munsell scale, 54f
Chromium (Cr2O3), corrosion resistance,
176
Chronic periodontitis, 406
Class IV restoration, hybrid composites,
100f
Clenching, 7
Clenching force, 4
Clinical relevance
definition, 381
vs. precision, 384–385, 385f
Clinical significance
definition, 381
vs. statistical significance, 386
Close-packed hexagonal lattice, 22f
Cobalt-chromium (Co-Cr)
Alloys, fusion temperatures, 181
castability, 181
clasps, impact, 183
selective laser melting, 185t
stress-strain curves, 83f
wrought, 200

Index

Cobalt-chromium-molybdenum cast alloys,
components, 264
Cobalt-chromium-nickel alloys, 196
Cobalt-chromium-tungsten-nickel wire, 200
Coefficient of thermal expansion
definition, 49, 57
mismatch, 223
Cohesion, 15, 43
Cold welding, 171, 200
Cold working, 71, 191
brass grain size and appearance, 192f
definition, 171
polycrystalline alloy dislocation, 191
recrystallization, 193
tensile strength and ductility, 194f
Cold-bend test, 71
Colloid, 275, 287
Colloidal theory, 296
Color, 52
chroma, 54
definition, 49
hue, 54
L*a*b* color chart, 55f
L*a*b* color space, 54
matching, 55
space, three dimensions, 53
value, 54
Color matching, intraoral scanner/cameras,
327
Commercial resin cements, 145f
Commercially pure titanium (CP-Ti), 177,
254
American Society for Testing and Material
grades, 177
composition (percent by weight), 264t
definition, 171
laser welding, 187
Complete removable dentures, 9f
Compomer, 129, 148, 148f
definition, 128
Composite resin veneers, 112
Composite restorative materials, 99t
Composites, 4, 16, 129
benefits, 42
biocompatibility, 110
conventional, 88
definition, 15
in dentistry, 42
environment, 111
factors influencing, 42
finishing and polishing, 111
history, 88
indirect restorations, 112
longevity, 108
long-term survival rates, 110t
low-shrinkage, 102
materials and instruments, 111
microstructure, 42
placement time, 110
repair, 111, 112f
surface coating and sealing, 111
traditional, 88
Compression molding technique
mold preparation, 235f, 235
separating medium selection and
application, 235–236
Compressive strength (CS), 70f
Compressive stress, 66, 65f

Computer-aided design/computer-aided
manufacturing (CAD-CAM), 34, 172,
220, 409
aesthetic ceramics, 328
bone reduction image, 329f
ceramic prostheses production, 221
chairside milling, 221
chairside system, 327
clinical case, 328
complete denture, 239–241
definition, 326, 401
dental application, 184
drill positioning guide, 329f
feldspathic ceramic block, 220f
hybrid system, 327
indications for, 327
materials, 327
processing, 184
stand-alone digital impression systems,
327
structural ceramics, 328
subtractive manufacturing, 327
Computer-aided manufacturing (or milling)
(CAM), 326
Concentration cell
corrosion, 61
definition, 50
Condensable composites, 101
Condensation
condensation pressure, 159
condenser points, 159
definition, 153
goal, 159
low-copper alloys, 154
polymerization, 41
procedure, 159
Condensation polymers, 38
Condensation silicone, 277
Condensed porcelain mass, 212
Conditioning unit, agar impression materials,
289f
Conductivity, ceramics, 205
Conductors, 57
Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT),
326, 330, 408
definition, 326
Cones, 52, 55
Configuration factor (C-factor), 106–107,
125, 149
definition, 87
Constant-stress accelerated lifetime testing
(CSALT), 383
Contact angle, 116
definition, 15, 115
probing liquids, solid surfaces, 47t
wetting, 45, 46f
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health
(COSHH), 368
Controlled memory, 199
Cooling process
alloy composition, 30
metal-ceramic prosthesis, 212
peritectic temperature, 31
Copolymerization, 35f, 41
Copolymers, 35
definition, 15
graft or branched, 15
random, 15

417

Copper (Cu), equilibrium cooling, 30
Copy milling, 184
Core ceramics, 202, 205
Coring, 29
Corrective waxes, 275, 303
Corrosion, 58,
classification, 59
concentration cell, 61
definition, 50
electrochemical, 59
electrochemical mechanism, 59
impact, 30
protection, 62
resistance
alloys, 172
austenitic stainless steels, 195
beta-titanium alloys, 200
chromium (Cr2O3), 176
decreased, 191
dental amalgams, 163f, 163
stress, 61
wear, 81
Corrosive wear, 81
Corundum, 341
Coupling agent, 88, 91
definition, 87
Covalent bond, 18, 19f
Cracks
fiberoptic transillumination, 398f
in metal-ceramic crown, 225f
propagation, 106f
propagation, interruption, 225
Crazing, 246f, 246
Creep, 51, 178, 247,
definition, 49, 153
dental amalgams, 162–163, 163f
Crevice corrosion, 61
Critical strain-energy release rate, 75
Crosslink, definition, 15
Crosslinked polymers, 35f
Crowns
base-metal alloys, 177t
cracking and fracture, 215f
Lava zirconia-based core, 217f
prostheses, 10f
veneered, 217f
Crucible former, 307f
Crystal, 20
Crystal imperfections, 188
Crystal planes, 20
Crystalline particle strengthening, 225
Crystalline structure, 20
two-dimensional illustration, 21f
CS 3600, 327
Cure shrinkage, 106
Curing
composites, 91
cycles, 238, 240f
definition, 15
delayed, 107
depth, 96
dual-cured resins, 96
exposure time, 96
lamps, 95–96
photocuring management, 113
ramped, 107
resin-based composites, 39
resin-based composites classification, 93

418

Index

Curing cycles, 238, 240f
Cuspid-guided disocclusion, 204
Custom trays, 250, 279, 279f
Cutting, 332
Cuttle, 340
Cytokines, 404
Cytology, 401
Cytotoxicity test, 355–365
D
Debonding, shear-stress failure, 66
Debubblizer, 46, 283
Deflection–load plot, 247f
Deformation, 65
definition, 64
polymers, 36
twinning (significance), 191
Degree of conversion (DC), 89
definition, 87
resin-based composites, 105
Delayed curing, 107
Delayed expansion, definition, 153
Dental alloys
allergic reactions
cobalt, 375
gold, 375
immunotoxicity of metal, 375
nickel allergy, 374
Ni-Pd cross-reactivity, 375
palladium allergy, 375
patch tests, 374
symptoms, 375
titanium and titanium alloys, 375
as corrosion cell, 62f
elements in
atom size, 25t
crystal structure and chemical properties,
25t
physical properties, 24t
local reactions, 373–374
metal ions released from alloys, 373
metal-joining operations, 185
microstructure, 373
properties, 172
surfaces, heterogeneous composition
(galvanic corrosion), 61
systemic reactions, 373
Dental amalgams
alloy
amalgamation, 155–157, 156f–158f
composition, 154–155, 154t, 155f
definition, 153
particle shapes, 153, 154f
powder configuration, 155
programmable triturator, 154f, 154
trituration capsules, 153, 154f
clinical manipulation
carving and finishing, 159–160, 160f
condensation procedure, 159
mechanical trituration, 158, 159f
mercury/alloy ratio, 158
clinical performance
cavity preparations, 163
dimensional change, 164
improper cavity preparation/finishing,
164, 165f
leakage, 163
marginal breakdown, 164f, 164

Dental amalgams (Continued)
repaired amalgam restorations, 165–166
survival of amalgam restorations, 165f,
165
ultimate lifetime, 164
clinical symptoms after application
allergic reactions, 371
environmental mercury exposure, 372
local reactions, 371f, 371
mercury handling in the dental office,
372
systemic reactions, 371
creep, 51
definition, 153
in dentistry, 42
mercury poisoning symptoms, 370
mercury release, 370
properties
creep, 162–163, 163f
dimensional stability, 160–161, 161f
strength, 161–162, 162f
tarnish and corrosion resistance, 163f,
163
safety
allergy, 166
mercury hygiene in dental offices, 166
regulation of amalgam use, 167
toxicity, 166
Dental bonding
agents, 118
technologies, turning points/events,
116f
Dental castable ceramic, definition, 202
Dental casting alloys, classification, 173
Dental casting mold, 307f
Dental cements
history, 129
indications for, 129
ISO 9917-1 requirements, 132t
ISO Requirements, 132t
overview of, 130t
performance criteria, 131
Dental ceramics, 202
abrasiveness, 204
acidulated phosphate fluoride (APF),
376
adverse reactions, 376
classification, 209t
fracture-toughness test, 388
history, 205
indications and contraindications, 222t
radioactivity of, 376
resin bonding, 219
selection principles, 228
Dental composites
chronology, 89f
classification, 92
clinical use, 102
curing, 93
filler particle size, 96
manipulation characteristics, 100
properties, 102
components, 88
definition, 87
history and achievements, 89f
optimization, 382f, 382
Dental gold casting alloys, strengthening
(occurrence), 33

Dental implants
design features, 382
fatigue test, 384f, 388
history, 253
loading, success, 260
longevity, 261
placement, 263f
popularity, 261
success/failure, International Congress of
Oral Implantologists Health Scale
rating, 261t
Dental laboratory, variables, 181
Dental materials
auxiliary materials, 10
biocompatibility, 356f, 356. See also
Biocompatibility
challenges, 10
coefficient of thermal expansion, 58t
density/thermal properties, 57t
future need, 12
hardness values, 339t
performance, 383
preventive materials, 8, 8f
properties, 3
restorative materials, 8
safety, 12
selection, 82
tissue repair/regeneration, 12
viscosity, 50
Dental plaster, 275, 295
Dental prostheses, virtual testing, 381
Dental resins
bioactive TiO2 nanoparticles, 403
clinical performance, 404
Dental restorations, chemical inertness, 203
Dental stone, 275
high strength (type IV), 300
high strength, high expansion (type V),
301
type III stone, 300
Dental waxes, 275
components, 302
flow of, 303
mechanical properties, 304
properties, 303
residual stress, 304
thermal properties, 303, 304f
types, 302
Dentifrices, 350
abrasiveness, 351
components, 350, 350t
composition, 350
Dentin, 5, 6f
bond strength, 385
coefficient of thermal expansion, 58t
density/thermal properties, 57t
etching, 117
prepared surfaces, 142f
priming, 120
radiodensity, 56
reactionary, 134f
stress-strain plot, 70f
Dentin-bonding agent
adhesives, 121
bond strengths, 122
classification, 120t, 123
composition, 118
definition, 115

Index

Dentin-bonding agent (Continued)
design, 120
etchants, 118
filler particles, 122
ingredients, 122
initiators, 121
microleakage, 122
M–R–X structures, 121f
primers, 120, 121f
requirements, 118
solvents, 121
Dentinoenamel junction (DEJ), 5, 6f, 81
Dentin–resin bond, 359–360
Dentistry
eutectic alloys, applications, 31
wrought metal, application, 193
Denture base
resin. See Prosthetic polymers and resins
retention, 43f
Denture cleansers, 250
Denture flask assembly, 238f
Denture liner, definition, 233
Denture repair, 248
Denture-base resins, in dentistry, 42
Dentures
complete removable, 9f
removable partial, 9f
Depth of cure, 94
definition, 87
Design of experiments (DOE)
definition, 381
flowchart, 382f, 382
steps, 383
Diametral compression test, 72, 73f
Diametral tensile strength, 72
Diamond, 341
Diamond abrasives, 341, 344
Diatoms, 341
Dicor glass-ceramic crowns, 213
Die stone, 300, 307
Dies, 50, 307t
Diffuse reflectance, 53
Diffusion, 21
Digital, definition, 326
Digital dentistry
additive manufacturing, 328
augmented reality, 331
color matching, 327
cone-beam computed tomography, 330
intraoral scanner/cameras, 326
prototyping tools, 327
virtual reality, 331
Digital impression, 326
Diketone photosensitizer, 95f
Dilatant
definition, 49
viscosity, 51
Dimensional change, in dies, 307t
Dimensional stability, 286, 286f
of amalgam
clinical significance, 164
mechanism of change, 160–161, 161f
moisture contamination, 161f, 161
hydrocolloid impressions, 292
zinc oxide–eugenol (ZOE) impression
paste, 295
Dimer dicarbamate dimethacrylate
(DDCDMA), 103, 104f

Dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate
(DMAEMA), 94
Dipoles, generation, 19
Dipping wax, 302
Direct composite restoration, 8, 9f
Direct metal laser sintering (DMLS), 185, 330
Direct-current arc melting machine, 318
Disinfection, hydrocolloid impressions, 293
Dislocations, 189
definition, 171
movement, absence, 191
Dispersion strengthening, 225
Disproportionation, 40f
Dissimilar metals, 60
4,8-Di(methacryloxy methylene)tricyclodecane (TCDDMA), 103
Divacancy, example, 189f
DMG Constic, 103
Doping, 214
Dose–response relationship of toxicity, 365f,
365
Double-cord technique, 280
Dough-forming time, 237
Dressing, definition, 332
Dry strength, gypsum products, 299
Dual-cured resin, 87, 96
Ductility, 65, 71
alloys, 173
cold working and annealing time, 194f
Duplicating materials, 293
DX-511, 103f, 103
Dynamic mechanical mixing, 281
E
Edge dislocation, 189
cubic crystal structure, 189f
Effective volume, 381, 386
Elastic deformation, 64, 68f
Elastic impression materials, 276
Elastic limit, 68–69
Elastic memory, 305
Elastic modulus, 18, 70, 70f
definition, 64
reduction, 194
Elastic properties, 67
Elastic recovery, definition, 15
Elastic strain, 37, 37f
Elastomeric impression materials
characteristics, 288t
chemistry, 277
common failures, 288t
components, 277
dimensional stability, 286
disinfection, 286
elasticity and viscoelasticity, 284
hand mixing, 281
impression-making technique, 281
impression removal, 282
impression trays, 279, 279f
manipulation, 280
mishandling, 287
polyether, 278, 279f
polysulfide impression material, 277, 277f
properties, 283, 284t
rheological properties, 283
tear strength, 285, 285f
tissue management, 280
working and setting times, 283

419

Elastomers, 37, 275–276
Electrical resistance, spot welding, 185
Electrical resistance–heated casting machine,
317
Electrochemical mechanism of corrosion, 59
Electrochemical properties, 58
Electrode potential, 59
Electroforming, 185
Electrogalvanism, definition, 50
Electromagnetic radiation, 53
Electromotive series, definition, 50
Electron-cloud model, nitrogen atom, 16f
Electronegativity, 28
Elements, periodic chart, 26f
Elgiloy wires, 199
Elongation, 67
Embryos, 24
Emerging technologies/products, research
(flow chart), 402f
Emery, 341
Enamel, 4
abrasiveness, 204
acid-etching, 11
carious lesion, 7f
coefficient of thermal expansion, 58t
density/thermal properties, 57t
elastic modulus, 81
etching, 117
glass-ionomer restoration, 126f
light effect, 53
microfracture, 204
plaque formation, 43f
refractive index, 53
stress-strain plot, 70f
transmission electron microscope images, 5f
Enamel-bonding agents, 118
Endodontic cement formula, 151
Endodontic sealer, 148
definition, 128
ISO 6876 and ADA 57 requirements for,
132t
solubilities, 132
Endodontics, 404
sealers, usage, 125
Endosseous implants, designs and materials,
258f
Endosteal implants, 254
blade designs, 258f
definition, 253
partial arch restorations, 258f
placement, 256f
Endurance limit, 173
Endurance strength, 76
Energy-balance approach, 76f
Enterococcus faecalis, 402
Epinephrine, 280
Epithelial implant, definition, 253
Epoxy system, 406
Epoxy-based sealer, 125, 148
Equiaxed grain microstructure, 25
Equilibrium-phase diagrams, 28
calculated weight percentages, basis, 29f
eutectic alloy, 30f
platinum-silver system, 31f
Erosion, 8f, 332, 334
Erosion test, cements, 131
Erosion wear, 81
Erythematous reaction sites, 361, 362f

420

Index

Esthetic dentistry, 52
Esthetics
definition, 49
restoration, 11
Estrogenicity, 355, 358
Etch and rinse adhesives, 122f
Etch-and-rinse technique, 117, 123
Ethyl silicate–bonded investments, 312
European Conformity (CE) marking, 12
Eutectic alloys
applications, 31
equilibrium-phase diagram, 30f
physical properties, 31
Eutectic composition, 30
Evidence-based dentistry (EBD)
definition, 390
level of evidence, 390
observational studies, 391
in vitro testing, 390
Evidence-based medicine, 381
External plasticizer, 37
F
Fabricating prostheses, alternative
technologies, 184
Fabrication
direct composite inlays, 112
metal-ceramic prosthesis, 212
molten alloy, 172
Face-centered cubic (FCC) cell, 20
Fatigue behavior, S-N diagram, 77f, 77
Fatigue failure, 76
Fatigue resistance, alloys, 173
Fatigue strength, 76, 173
Fédération Dentaire Internationale (FDI),
364, 387
Feldspathic ceramics, 202
Feldspathic porcelain, 203, 207
autoglazed, 209
glazing, 209
principal phase fields, 207f
types, 207
Ferric sulfate, 135
Ferrite, 194
Ferritic stainless steels, 195
compositions, 195t
Fillers, 42, 88, 122
benefits, 90
characteristics, 90
definition, 87
function, 90
loading maximizing, 102
ormocer, 91
particle size, 96, 97t
types, 91
Film thickness
definition, 128
dental cements, 131
Filtek LS (3M ESPE), 103
Filtek Universal, 403
Finishing
benefits, 333
composites, 111
definition, 332
procedures
aerosols, production, 338
goals, 333
technique, steps, 345

Finite-element analysis (FEA), 229f
accuracy, 384
definition, 381
elements, 384
solid model, 383, 384f
stress and strain results, 384
Fissure sealants, 126
Fixed dental prostheses (FDPs), 66f, 66, 206
base-metal alloys, 177t
sag deformation, 179f
Flavored fluoride varnish, 136f
Flexibility, 71
Flexural strength, 73
Flow, 52
definition, 276
division, 281
temperature, 186
Flowable composite, definition, 87, 100
Fluid-resin technique, 241–242, 242f
Fluids
rheological behaviors, 51f
viscosity, 51
Fluorapatite glass-ceramic, 214
Fluorescence, 56
Fluoridated varnishes, 135
Fluoride recharge, 134
Fluoride release
fillers, 90
profiles, 133f
Fluoride-releasing materials
clinical significance, 133
factors affecting, 133
fluoride-release profiles, 133f
Flux
definition, 171
entrapment, 186
inclusions, 187
metal oxides, combination, 186
noble-metal alloys, 186
soldering, 185
usage, 186
Force, 4, 50, 65
Foreign bodies, casting, 321, 322f
Formocresol, 135
Four-point test, 73f
Fractography
all-ceramic prostheses, 398
crack features, 397
definition, 390
fracture surface characteristics, 396
principal fracture paths, 397f, 397
vinyl polysiloxane impression, 397
Fracture
ceramic connectors, 228
Griffith criterion, 76f
midpontic, three-unit bridges, 229f
plastic deformation, 67
porcelain crowns, 206
restorations, 74
susceptibility
metal-ceramic/all-ceramic restorations,
design effect, 226
tensile, resistance, 204
toughness, 204
Fracture toughness, 64, 75
definition, 64
glass-ionomer materials, 144t
restorative materials, 144t

Fractured connectors, 227
Fractured maxillary central incisor, 100f
Fractured microfilled composite, 99f
Fractured Procera AllCeram premolar crown,
397f
Fractured prosthesis, repair, 248
Fracture-resistant all-porcelain crowns, 206
Free radicals, 92
chain transfer, occurrence, 41f
definition, 87
Fretting wear, 81
Friction, 78, 80
kinetic, 80
laws of, 80
mechanism, 80
static, 80
Frit, 207
Frost paradigm, 269
schematic diagram, 269f
Fuel-gas combustion, thermal characteristics,
186t
Fully stabilized zirconia (FSZ), 216
Fumed silica particles
formation, pyrogenic reaction, 97f
transmission electron microscope image,
98f
Furnace soldering, 186
Fused deposition modeling (FDM), 326, 330
Fused filament fabrication (FFF), 330
Fused granular fabrication (FGF), 330
Fused particle fabrication (FPF), 330
G
G-aenial Universal Flo, 403
Galvanic corrosion, 59
definition, 50
Galvanic currents
clinical significance, 62
mouth, 60f
Galvanic shock, 60
definition, 50
γ-Methacryl-oxypropyltrimethoxy silane, 92f
Garnet, 341
Gel, 287
definition, 275
Gel point/gelation, 106
definition, 87
Gelation, 106
alginate impression material, 290
definition, 275
reversible hydrocolloid, 287
General controls, 368
Genetic issue, teeth, 7f
Genotoxicity, 355, 358
Gingivitis, 361, 362f, 373
Giomer, 104, 147
Glass
insulating abilities, 135
modifiers, 208
strengthening, thermal tempering (usage),
225
Glass polyalkenoate cement, 140
Glass-ceramics, 34, 213
definition, 202
fluorapatite, 214
Glass-infiltrated core ceramic systems, 218
cross-sectional illustration, 218f
definition, 202

Index

Glass-ionomer cement (GIC), 405
adverse reactions, 376–377
calcium aluminate, 149f
chemistry and setting, 141
clinical manipulation, 142
composition and release of substances, 376
cumulative fluoride release, 144t
definition, 128
fracture toughness, 144t
high-viscosity, 144
nominal compositions, 141t
properties, 144t
structure, 142f
unreacted particles, 142f
usage, 140
Glass-transition temperature, 21, 303
definition, 15
plot, 23f
polymethacrylate ester, 38f, 38
Glaze ceramics, 202, 209
Globally Harmonized System of Classification
and Labeling of Chemicals (GHS),
368, 369f
Glycerin, 289
Glycerol phosphate dimethacrylate (GPDM)
monomers, 103
Gold
atoms, location (randomness), 33
ductility, 71
monoatomic metals, 34f
Gold crown, mechanical retention, 137f
Gold-based alloys, 175
Gold-copper system, 31
alloys, heat treatment, 175
phase diagram, 32f
structure, 32f
Gold-palladium alloys, metal-ceramic systems,
179
Gold-palladium-silver alloys, metal-ceramic
systems, 179
Gold-platinum-palladium alloys, high noble/
noble alloys, 179
Graft copolymer, 15, 36
Graft materials, 404
Grain, 25
boundary, 25
definition, 15
Grain growth, 193
definition, 171
Grain refinement, 26
definition, 171
Grain size, 26
solidification, 28
Gray scale, 49, 54
Green shrinkage, 312
Green state
definition, 202
milling, 221f
Green strength, gypsum products, 299
Greening, 181
Griffith energy approach, 396
Griffith theory, 75
Grinder’s disease, 338
Grinding
definition, 332
operation, 337
processes, biological hazards, 338
Ground quartz filler particles, 97f

Guidelines for material selection
anamnesis (Patient’s Account of Medical
History), 379
intended use and indications for materials,
378
main components of the material, 378
risk communication, 374f, 379
risks vs. benefits of dental materials, 378
safety and performance of material, 378,
379t
treatment planning, 379
Gum dammar, 302
Gutta-percha, 125, 129
Gypsum
die stones, 307
fabrication, 50
models, 276
Gypsum-based investment, 295, 315
Gypsum-bonded investments
casting shrinkage, 309
classifications, 309
composition, 309
dimensional change, 309f
hygroscopic expansion
magnitude, 310
sources, 315
water/powder (W/P) ratio, 310f, 310
porosity, 311
setting expansion, 310
storage, 311
strength, 311
thermal expansion, 310, 310f–311f
Gypsum products
calcination process, 295f
care of, 301
cast care, 302
definition, 275
dental stone, 300–301
impression plaster (type I), 300
infection control, 302
manipulation, 301
mixing and pouring, 301
mixing time, 296
model plaster, 300
mounting casts, 301
powder particle, 295f
production, 295
properties, 300t
proportioning, 301
refractory filler addition, 295
setting, 296
dimensional changes, 298f
expansion mechanism, 297
hygroscopic, 298
reaction, 296, 296f
setting time, 296
control, 296
modifiers for controlling, 297
strength, 299
manipulation and additives, 300
water content, 299
water/powder ratio, 299
types, 300
working time, 296
H
Hagger’s dentin-bonding system, 120
Hand dermatitis, 360

421

Hand mixing, elastomeric impression, 281
Hard glass, 91
Hardened type III/IV gold alloy castings,
restoration, 33
Hardness
alloys, 173
definition, 64
Heat, homogenization heat treatment, 29
Heat-activated denture base resin
vs. chemical-activated denture base resins,
241
compression molding technique
mold preparation, 235f, 235
separating medium selection and
application, 235–236
polymerization
polymerization cycles/curing cycles, 238,
240f
temperature–time heating curves, 238,
240f
via microwave energy, 239, 240f
preparation
crosslinking agents, 234f, 236
denture flask assembly, 238f
dough-forming time, 237
injection molding technique, 238, 239f
packing, 237f–238f, 237–238
polymer-monomer interaction, 236
polymer-to-monomer ratio, 236
powder–liquid systems, 234f, 236
representation, 234f
working time, 237
Hertzian cone cracks, 223
Hertzian load, 75
Heterogeneous microfill composites, 97
Heterogeneous nucleation, 24
Hierarchy of evidence, 381, 382f
High noble (HN) alloys
all-metal prosthesis usage, 175
gold-platinum-palladium alloys, 179
metal-ceramic systems, 179
systems, solid-state reactions, 31
High-frequency induction, argon/arc, 176
High-heat thermal expansion technique, 315
High-palladium alloys, Pd-Ga system, 33
High-viscosity glass-ionomer cements, 144, 145f
Homogeneous microfill composites, 97
Homogeneous nucleation, 24
Homogeneous solution, 28
Homogenization heat treatment, 29
Hooke’s law, 67–68, 70
Hot-isostatically pressed (HIP) core ceramic,
213
Hot-pressed ceramics, 202, 213
H-statements, 368
Hue
definition, 49
Munsell scale, 54f
three-dimensional color solid, 54
Humans, vision role, 52
Hume–Rothery rules, 28
Hunter L*a*b* color chart, 55f
Hybrid composites, 100, 101f
Hybrid ionomer cement, 147, 151
definition, 128
Hybrid layer, 117, 123
Hybrid material, 278
Hydration theory, 296

422

Index

Hydraulic cements, 128, 149
Hydrocolloid impressions
accuracy, 293
dimensional stability, 292
disinfection, 293
duplicating materials, 293
failures, 299t
gypsum setting, 292
irreversible, 290
properties, 292
reversible, 287
sol–gel transformation, 287
Hydrodynamic theory, 358
Hydrofluoric acid (HF)
calcium gluconate gel, 376
emergency treatment, 376
etching, 146
exposure of skin, mucosa, and eyes, 376
fume inhalation, 376
risks, 376
ventilation, 376
Hydrogen, heat source, 186
Hydrogen bond, 20
dipole attraction, 20
formation, 20f
Hydrogen bridge, 20
Hydroxyapatite (HA), 265, 403
HA-coated implants, 265
characteristics, 266
coating and bone quality, 267, 267f
2-Hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA), 120,
148
Hygroscopic expansion, 310, 310f
definition, 306
magnitude, 310
water/powder (W/P) ratio, 310f, 310
Hygroscopic low-heat technique, 315
Hygroscopic setting expansion, 275, 298, 298f
Hygroscopy, 298
Hypersensitivity, 355, 360
I
Ice, 16
IdentAlloy certificate, 174f
IdentAlloy codes, 231
IdentAlloy program, 173
IdentCeram certificate, 231, 231f
Imbibition, 275, 292
Immunotoxicity
concept, 362
glutathione (GSH) to mercury ions, 363f,
362
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α)
secretion, 363f, 363
Impact strength, 74, 247
Implantation, 253
definition, 253
Implants
attachment mechanism, 256
biocompatibility, 267
biomaterials, 262
bone, integration, 269
ceramic and ceramic-like coated metal, 265
classification, 254
clinical success, evaluation, 260
components, 259, 259f
dentistry, Stage 1 surgery, 260f
design, 254

Implants (Continued)
load transfer, balance, 262
material/host, primary surface interactions,
268
metallic, 262
placement, 260, 269
properties, 256
prosthesis, fit (consideration), 269
restoration, intention, 260
selection, 266
site, loading condition types (occurrence),
269
Stage 2 surgical technique, 260f
strength, 266
surgical placement, 260
Implant-supported restorations, difference, 258
Implant-to-bone interaction
(osseointegration), 257
Impression
digital, 326
removal, 276
shelf life, 292
trays, 279, 279f
wax, 303
Impression compound, 276, 294
Impression materials, 275
classification, 276, 277t
composition, 276
in dentistry, 42
elastic, 276
fluid-to-solid transformation, 50
gypsum products, 295
hydrocolloids, 287
inelastic, 276, 294
irreversible, 276
reversible, 276
setting mechanism, 276
Impression plaster, 294
Improper cavity preparation/finishing, 164,
165f
In vitro bonding tests, 182
In vitro research, dental materials
accelerated lifetime testing (ALT), 383f,
383
clinical vs. statistical significance, 386
definition, 381
design of experiments (DOE), 382f,
382–383
drawbacks, 381
hierarchy of evidence, 381, 382f
limitations of standards, 388
merits, 381
precision vs. clinical relevance
dentin bond-strength evaluation, 385
microtensile bond-strength test (μTBS),
385f, 385
single material property measurement,
384
standardization
ADA Specifications and Acceptance
Program, 387
International Standards, 387–388
testing methods, 381
virtual modeling, 383–384, 384f
Weibull size effect, 385–386, 386f–387f
In vitro tests, 366, 390
In vivo fluoride recharging, 134
In-Ceram Spinel (ICS), 218

In-Ceram Zirconia, 219
Incomplete casting, 323, 323f–324f
Indirect posterior composites, 112
Indirect restorations, 112
Indirect restorative materials, 8, 9f
Induction
addition polymerization, 39, 39f
melting casting machine, 318f
Inelastic, definition, 275
Inelastic impression materials, 276
impression compound, 294
impression plaster, 294
zinc oxide–eugenol, 294
Infection-control procedures, 247
Inflammation, allergies, 361, 362f
Infrared spectroscopy, 409
Inhibitors, 87, 92
Inhomogeneous dental gold alloy, tarnish/
corrosion (impact), 30
Initiator, 121
definition, 87
polyether impression material, 278
Injection molding technique, 238, 239f
Inlay wax, 302
definition, 276
flow requirements, 304t
manipulation, 304
thermal expansion, 304f
thermal expansion coefficient, 58
time–temperature cooling curve, 304f
Insulators, 57
Interatomic bonds, 17
Interfacial zone fracture, cross-sectional
illustration, 226f
Intermetallic compound, 28
International Congress of Oral
Implantologists Health Scale, dental
implant success/failure rating, 261t
International Organization for Standardization
(ISO), 387
Interstitial atom, 188, 189f
Interstitial solid solution, 28
Intraoral digital scanner, digital impressions,
326
Invariant point, 30
Investment, 307f
burnout, 309
ethyl silicate–bonded investments, 312
gypsum-based materials, 309
hygroscopic expansion, 310
materials, 308
phosphate-bonded, 311
procedure, 313
shrinkage, compensation, 313
types, 309
Ion exchange, 225
Ion implantation, 262
Ionic bonds, 18, 19f
Ionomers, 124, 129
IPS Empress (leucite-based product), 213
IPS Empress 2 (Ivoclar Vivadent), 213
Iron-carbon system, 194
Irreversible hydrocolloid, 290
Irreversible materials, 276
ISO 7405#1997, 364
ISO 14971#2019, 356
ISO 10993, Biological Evaluation of Medical
Devices, 367

Index

ISO 7405#2018, Evaluation of
Biocompatibility of Medical Devices
Used in Dentistry, 364, 367
ISO standard, 388
iTero, 327
Ivoclar Tetric EvoCeram Bulk Fill Aessencio
Technology, 102
Ivory-colored wax, 302
Izod-type impact tester, 74
K
Kalore, 103f, 103
Kelvin (K), 57
definition, 49
Kerr Vertise Flow, 103
Kieselguhr, 341
Kinetic energy, 16
Kinetic friction, 80
Knoop hardness test, 79
L
Labeling, 368, 369f
Laboratory grinding/finishing kit, 347f
Lamellar eutectic structure, formation, 30
Lamellar structure, formation, 30
Large-particle composite, 97
Laser photothermal radiometry (PTR), 408
Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF), 330
Laser welding, commercially pure titanium,
187
Laser-induced fluorescence, 408
Latexes, 251
Lattice types, 22f
Lava zirconia-based core, 217f
Laws of Sliding Friction, 80
Layered structure, formation, 30
LED lamps, 95
Lethal dose fifty (LD50), 355–365
Lichenoid contact lesions, 361f, 361
Lichenoid reactions, 371
Life Ceramics Analysis and Reliability
Evaluation software (CARES), 229
Light
attenuation, 96
nature, 52
source effect, 56
visible spectrum, 52f
white, 52f
Light-activated denture base resins, 242, 243f
Light-cured composite, 88, 94
advantages and disadvantages, 94
definition, 87
diketone photosensitizer, 95f
Line defects (dislocations), 189, 189f
Linear coefficient of expansion
definition, 49
Linear polymers, 35f
Linear shrinkage, 243
Liner, 307f
Liquefaction temperature, agar, 287
Liquid remineralizing dentin bonding agents,
404
Liquid-based cytology, 409
Liquid/powder ratio (L/P), 321
Liquid-to-solid transformation, 25
Liquidus, 28
Lithia disilicate, 213, 328
Lithia-disilicate-based ceramic core, 215f

Lithium disilicate all-ceramic crown, 10f
Local effects, 356, 357f
bone–implant interface, 360
concept, 356, 357f
foreign substances entry, 358f, 358
inflammatory response, 357f
microleakage, 359f, 359
nanoleakage, 359f, 359–360
periodontium, 359f, 359
pulp tissue, 358
tooth–restoration interfaces, 359f, 359–360
Local reactions
dental alloys, 373–374
dental amalgam, 371f, 371
gingival reactions, 373
pulp reactions, 372
Long-term resilient soft liner
definition, 233
processing, 249
Lost wax technique, 171–172, 306
Low-fusing ceramics, 207
Low-shrinkage composites, 102
Low-viscosity hybrid ionomers, 147
Lucite, 328
Luminous reflectance, 49
Luting, 124
cements, usage, 137
mechanical retention, 137
Luting agent, 124, 137
definition, 128
M
3M Filtek One Bulk Fill Smart Contrast Ratio
Management system, 102
Machinable glass-ceramic (MGC), 206, 213
Macrofill composite, 88, 97
Macromolecules, polymers, 34
Magnesia, 216
Magnesia-alumina spinel, 218
Magnesium oxide (MgO), 33, 34f
Magnet, definition, 50
Magnetic materials, 62
Magnetism, 63
Magnetite, 63
Malleability, 71, 173
definition, 64
Malocclusion, 6
Managing accurate resin curing (MARC), 113
Mandibular staple implant, 255
Manually condensed feldspathic veneering
porcelains, 212
Marginal breakdown
clinical performance, 164f, 164
definition, 153
Martensite, 195
Martensitic stainless steels, 195
Master die, preparation, 306
Mastication, forces, 136
Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS), 368
Matrix, definition, 88
Maturation, 128–129
Maxillofacial prosthetics
chlorinated polyethylene (CPE), 252
latexes, 251
polyurethane polymers, 252
silicone rubbers, 252
tear resistance, 251
vinyl plastisols, 251

423

Maximum elastic strain, 67
Mechanical integrity, 11
Mechanical interlocking, 46
Mechanical issue, teeth, 7, 8f
Mechanical mixing, 313
Mechanical properties
strain, 67
strength, 67
stress, 65, 65f
stress-strain properties, 68
Medit i500, 327
Medium wax, 302
Melanocortin peptides, 407
Mercury, 166, 370. See also Dental amalgam
Mercury/alloy ratio, 158
Mesio-occulso-distal (MOD) restoration, 310
Metal bonds, 342
Metal oxides flux, combination, 186
Metal prosthesis, 23
Metal-backed strips, 343
Metal-ceramic (MC) alloys, castability studies,
181
Metal-ceramic (MC) applications
alloy requirements, 178
base-metal alloys, 177t
metals, porcelain bonding, 178
solidus temperature, 178
thermal contraction, coefficient, 179
Metal-ceramic (MC) contraction mismatch,
effect, 179
Metal-ceramic (MC) crown, 10f
crack patterns, 226f
crack, three-unit bridge cooling, 225f
designs, 227f
porcelain veneer, residual stress, 224f
Metal-ceramic prosthesis
alloy composition and properties, 178, 210t
bond failure, 211f
bond strength, 212
ceramic types, 207
compatibility, 211
cooling, 212
definition, 202
fabrication, 212
firing procedure, 212
high noble alloys
compositions, 175, 180t
physical and mechanical properties, 175t
multiple firings, impact, 212
occlusal surface, design, 182
porcelain bonding, 211
ultralow-fusing ceramics, 207
Metal-ceramic restorations, fracture
susceptibility, 226
Metal-ceramic (MC) systems, 206
gold-palladium alloys, 179
gold-palladium-silver alloys, 179
gold-platinum-palladium alloys, 179
high noble alloys, 175, 179
metal-ceramic contraction mismatch, effect,
179
noble alloys, 175, 179
palladium-copper-gallium alloys, 181
palladium-gallium alloys, 181
palladium-gold alloy, 179
palladium-gold-silver alloys, 179
palladium-silver alloys, 179
stress and intraorally induced stresses, 224f

424

Index

Metal-ceramic (MC) systems (Continued)
thermal compatibility, 179, 224f
thermal contraction coefficient, 179
thermal expansion coefficient, 179
thermally incompatible, 224f
Metal-joining processes, 185
Metallic bond, 19, 19f
Metallic implants, 262
materials, mechanical properties/density,
259t
usage, debate, 266
Metallic mercury, 370
Metallic prostheses, resin cements, 146
Metallic restoration, 61f
Metals, 16
characteristics, 23
definition, 15
dissimilar, 60
electromotive series, 60t
grain refinement and size, 26
laboratory grinding/finishing kit, 347f
liquid-to-solid transformation, 25
microstructure, 24
plastic deformation, inherent ability, 188
porcelain, bonding, 178, 211
solidification, 24
strengthening, effects, 191
theoretical/observed shear strengths, 188
Metamerism, 56
definition, 49
Methacryl polyhedral oligomeric
silsesquioxane, 91f
Methacrylates, 360
allergic reactions, 373
local reactions
gingival reactions, 373
pulp reactions, 372
released substance vs. polymerization, 372
systemic reactions, 372
4-Methacryloxyethyl trimellitic acid
(4-META), 103
12-Methacryloyloxydodecylpyridinium
bromide (MDPB), 122
Methyl mercury, 370
Methylmethacrylate
chain transfer, 41f
free radical approaches, 39f
Methylmethacrylate copolymer, 35f
Micelles, 287
Microcracks, 246f, 246
Microcrystalline wax, 302
Microfilled (heterogeneous microfill)
composites, 97
fractured, 99f
inorganic filler loading, 97
resin filler particles preparation, 98f
Microleakage, 115, 359f, 359
definition, 115
measurement, 122
Micromechanical bonding, 16, 46
Micromechanical interlocking, 360
Micromotion, 261
definition, 253
Microporosity, 322f
Microstructure, 15, 25
Microtensile bond-strength test (μTBS), 385f,
385
Microwave irradiation, 299

Minamata Convention on Mercury, 167
Mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA), 135
definition, 128
pH, 150
pulp capping, 135
pulpotomies, 135
Mineral-based waxes, 302
Mini-implants
indications, 254
orthodontic anchorage, 256f
Mixing systems, 280, 280f
Model, definition, 275
Modeling plastic, 294
Modified α-hemihydrate, 295
Modified alginates, 290
Modulus of elasticity, 70
Molecule, 16
Molten alloy, rapid cooling (roomtemperature water bath/ice-water bath
usage), 32
Moment, 66
Monoclinic lattice, 22f
Monolithic zirconia, 217
Monomer and mer, 16
Monophase technique, 282
shear rate and elapsed time, 283t
stone casts and dies, 283
Montan wax, 302
Mouth, galvanic current, 60f
Multicomponent alloy systems, 33
Multiple-mix technique, 281, 282f
Munsell three-dimensional (3-D) color space,
53
Mutagenicity, 355, 358
Mylar-backed abrasive strips, 342f
N
Nanocomposites, 99
Nanofill composites, 99
Nanoleakage, 359f, 359–360
Nanometer-sized silica particles, 122
Nanoparticles, 151, 402
Nanostructures, 405
Nanotechnology, 401–402
Natural gas, heat source, 186t
Natural healing biological process, 12
Natural rubber latex (NRL)
allergic reactions, 377
composition and release of substances,
377
precautionary measures, 377
Natural teeth, implants (attachment), 270
Natural waxes, 302
N’Durance, 103
Near-ultraviolet radiation, 56
Newton, 4
Newtonian viscosity, 51
Newton’s third law of motion, 65
Nickel-chromium (Ni-Cr) alloys, 181
Nickel-titanium alloys, 196
endodontic instrument, 198, 199f
mechanical properties, 197
superelasticity and shape memory, 197
Nickel-titanium wires, 405
Ni-Cr-Be alloys, 174
Nitinol, 196
Nitrogen atom, electron-cloud model, 16f
Nobio QASi composites, 402

Noble (N) alloys
all-metal prosthesis usage, 175
gold-platinum-palladium alloys, 179
metal-ceramic prosthesis composition, 177t
metal-ceramic systems, 179
systems, solid-state reactions, 31
torch melting, 318
Noble metals, 58, 172
content classification, 173, 173t
corrosion, 62
definition, 171
Noble-metal wires, 200, 200t
physical properties, 200t
Nonbonded abrasives, 343
Noncarious cervical carious lesions, 8f
Nonconsumable tungsten electrode, argon/
arc, 176
Noncrystalline structure, 21
Noneugenol cements, 140
Nongypsum die materials, 307
No-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL),
355, 365
Normal setting expansion, 275, 298
NovaBone Dental Putty, 404
N-phenyl glycine and glycidyl methacrylate
(NPG-GMA), 120
Nucleus formation, 24
O
Observational studies, 391
Observer, effect, 55
Obturation, 125
definition, 115
Occlusal reduction, diamond burs (usage),
343f
Occupational hazards for dental personnel,
363–364
Omnichroma, 403
Opacity, 53
definition, 49
Opening-mode loading, 76
Optical effects, 52
Optical modifiers, 92
Optically based caries diagnosis, 330
Oral cavity
dental material challenges, 10
force, 4
mastication, 4
Oral environment, electrochemical action
(impact), 58
Oral mucosa, epithelial implant, 255
Organically modified ceramics, 91
Ormocer, 91
Orthodontic anchorage, mini-implants
(usage), 256f
Orthodontic bands, cementing, 144
Orthodontic brackets, 125, 146
Orthogonal arrays, 383
Orthorhombic lattice, 22f
Osseointegration, 253, 355, 257, 360
Osteoconductive
definition, 401
properties, 404
Osteogenesis, 405
Osteoinductive
ability, 265
definition, 253
Osteonecrosis, 406

Index

Ostim-Paste, 404
Oxidation, 59
Oxidation potential, 59
Oxide-doped zirconia, 216
Oxygen-inhibited layer, 93
definition, 88
P
Packable composites, 101
Palladium-based alloy
optical microscopic image, 27f
scanning electron microscope image, 27f
Palladium-based alloys, 33
Palladium-copper-gallium alloys, 181
Palladium-gallium alloys, 181
Palladium-gold alloy, 179
Palladium-gold-silver alloys, 179
Palladium-silver (Pd-Ag) alloys, 28, 31f
equilibrium-phase diagrams, 29f
metal-ceramic systems, 179
Paper-backed discs, 342f
Paraffin wax flakes, 302
Partial arch restorations, endosteal implants,
258f
Partially stabilized zirconia (PSZ), 216
Pascal (Pa), 4
Passivating oxide, 195
Passivation, 262
Paste–paste system, 146
Patch test for allergies, 362f, 362
Patient reports, 377–378
Pattern waxes, 302
Pearlite, 194
Pentron Fusio Liquid Dentin, 103
PepGen P-15, 404
Peptide amphiphiles (PAs), 405
Percent elongation, 173
Perceptibility threshold (PT), 54
Peri-implantitis, 261
Perimucositis, 261
Periodic chart (elements), 26f
Periodontal ligament stem cells (PDLSCs),
407
Periodontal tissue regeneration, 406
Periodontium disease, 359f, 359
PerioGlas, 404
Periosteum, subperiosteal implant
(positioning), 257f
Peritectic alloys, 31
Permanent or plastic deformation, 64
Phase and phase diagram, 28
compositions, 30
definition, 16
interpretation, 29
solid solutions, 29
pH-cycling testing methodology, 391
Phosphate-bonded investments
casting, 316
composition, 311
setting reaction, 311
surface quality, 312
thermal expansion, 312, 312f
working and setting time, 312
Photocuring, 113
Photopolymerization, 8
Photothermal radiometry and modulated
luminescence (PTR-LUM), 408
Physical properties, 50

Pickling process, 319
Piston-on-three-ball test, 74f
Pit
corrosion, 61
sealants, 126
Plaster of Paris, 295
setting expansion, 299t
strength
drying, 300t
mixing time, 304t
water/powder (W/P) ratio, 304t
Plastic deformation, 19
dislocation movement, absence, 191
shear force, 68f
Plastic strain, 37
Plastic-backed strips, 343
Plasticity, 65
Plasticization, 37
Plasticizers, 37
Plasticizing, 36–37
Pneumoconiosis, 364
Point contact, 75
Point defects, 188, 189f
Poisson’s ratio, 72
Polish, definition, 332
Polishing, 159–160, 160f, 332
Polyacrylic acid (PAA), 148
Polycarboxylate, insulating abilities, 136
Polycrystalline, 25
Polycrystalline alloys, dislocation movement,
190
Polycrystalline alumina, 328
Polycrystalline ceramic restorations, 146
Polycrystalline zirconia, 328
Polydispersity, polymers, 35
Polyether impression material, 278
elasticity and viscoelasticity, 284
ring-opening polymerization, 279f
Polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS), 91
Polymeric prostheses, resin cements, 146
Polymerization, 16, 34
addition, 39
chemistry, 38
condensation, 41
curing, 96
mechanism, 38
microwave energy, 239, 240f
polymerization cycles/curing cycles, 238, 240f
step-growth, 41
temperature–time heating curves, 238, 240f
shrinkage
dimensional changes, 244f, 244
maxillary denture bases, 243t
thermal shrinkage, 243–244
volumetric and linear shrinkage, 243
Polymer–monomer interaction, 236
Polymers, 16
chain branching, 35
copolymer structures, 35
crosslinking, 35
definition, 16
dissolution properties, 36
fundamental nature, 35
linear, yield point, 69f
mechanical properties, 36
molecular organization, 36
molecular weight, 35
polymerization, 38

425

Polymers (Continued)
radiopacity, 56
rheometric properties, 37
solvation properties, 37
thermal properties, 37
Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), 88, 233,
234f
Polysulfide impression material, 277, 277f
Polysulfide materials, 286
Polyurethane polymers, 252
Polyvinyl siloxane (PVS), 286
hydrophilized, 286
impression material, 277, 284
sealers, 148
Polyvinylchloride (PVC), 37
Pontic
chipped veneer ceramic, 215f
veneer ceramic chipping, 215f
Porcelain
adherence, 180
bonding, 172
classification, 209t
debonding, metal pontic substrate, 223f
definition, 202
in dentistry, 42
discoloration, silver (impact), 179
feldspathic, 202–203
finishing kit, 346f
oxide layer, thickness/wetting, 181
thermal contraction mismatch, 224
VITA Zahnfabrik development, 206
Porcelain fused to metal (PFM), 9, 178, 206
Porcelain teeth, 251
Porosity, 245f, 245
Posterior composites, selection criteria, 113
Postmarket surveillance, 368
Potassium silicate glass, amorphous structure,
203f
Powder–liquid system
compomer, 148f
for hand mixing, 149f
Powder-to-liquid (P/L) ratio, 131
Precious metals, 173
Precipitation hardening, 171, 191
Precision, 381, 384
Predominantly base metal (PB), 173
Premarket approval (PMA), 368
Press-on metal (POM) method, 220
Pressure, 4, 64, 66
Preventive dental material, 3, 8, 8f
Preventive sealant, 8f
Preventive-resin restoration (PRR), 126
Primary bond, 18, 19f
combination of, 19
definition, 16
Primary sprue, wax pattern orientation, 307f
Primers, 118, 120, 121f
definition, 115
silane, 220
Procera AllCeram, 219
Procera AllCeram alumina-based crown, 397
Processing stresses, 246
Processing wax, 303
Product safety data sheet (PSDS), 368
Proof stress (yield strength), 173
Propagation, 39
and chain growth, 40f
reactions, 39

426

Index

Propane, heat source, 186
Propane-oxygen torch flame, flame zones,
187f
Proportional limit, 67, 69, 70f
definition, 64
ProRoot MTA, 149
Prospective analysis study, 390, 392
Prostheses
cementing mechanics, 138f
devices and restorations, 276
fabrication, 178
first-stage contraction, 184
Prosthetic polymers and resins
acrylic resins, 233, 234f
additional procedures
denture cleansers, 250
denture repair, 248
rebasing resin dentures, 250
relining resin denture bases, 250
resin impression trays and tray materials,
250
short-term and long-term resilient soft
denture liners, 248–249
biological properties
allergic reactions, 248
infection-control procedures, 247
toxicology, 248
CAD-CAM procedures, 239–241
chemical basis, 234f
chemical-activated denture base resins,
241–242, 242f
general fabrication technique, 234
heat-activated resin
compression molding technique,
235–236, 235f
polymerization procedure, 238–239
preparation, 237f–239f, 236–238
representation, 234f
light-activated denture base resins, 242, 243f
maxillofacial prosthetics
chlorinated polyethylene (CPE), 252
latexes, 251
polyurethane polymers, 252
silicone rubbers, 252
vinyl plastisols, 251
physical properties
crazing, 246f, 246
creep, 247
impact strength and hardness, 247
polymerization shrinkage, 242–244,
243t, 244f
porosity, 245f, 245
processing stresses, 246
solubility, 246
strength, 246–247, 247f
water sorption, 245
resin teeth for prosthetic applications, 251
Prosthetic resin-veneering materials, 112
Prototyping, definition, 326
Provisional restorative materials, 10
Pseudoelasticity, 197
Pseudoperiodontium, 257
Pseudoplastic, definition, 49
Pseudoplastic fluids, viscosity, 51
Pseudoplasticity, 275, 283
P-statements, 368
Puce, 53
Pulp, physiological functions, 5

Pulp capping, 129
definition, 128
Pulp damage, 358, 372
Pulp protection, cements, 134
Pulpotomies, 135
Pumice, 341
Pure metals, 23, 26f
Putty-wash technique, 277, 282
Pyrogenic reaction, 97f
Q
Quantitative light-induced fluorescence
(QLF), 408
caries diagnosis, 330
definition, 326
QLF-D BiLuminator, 331
Quartz, 90, 341
Quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH) lamps, 95
Quaternary ammonium bound to silica
(QASi), 402
Quenching, 32
R
Radiopacity, 56, 90
Ramped curing, 107
Random copolymer, 15, 35
Randomized controlled clinical trial, 392
definition, 390
Reactionary dentin, 134f
Reactor, 277
Rebasing
definition, 233
resin dentures, 250
Reciprocal clasp, 64
Recombinant human bone morphogenetic
protein-2 (rhBMP-2), 404
Recovery, 171, 193–194
Recrystallization, 191
definition, 171
Reflection, 53
definition, 49
Refractory
definition, 276, 306
material, 302, 307f
Refract/refraction, 53
definition, 49
Reinforcement material, 42
Reinforcing filler particles, 97t
Reinforcing material, 42
Relining, definition, 233
Relining resin denture bases, 250
Remineralizing agents and materials, 404
Removable partial dentures (RPDs)
alloys for, 183
base metal alloys, 183
composition/mechanical properties, 183t
clasp seating, 65f
ductility and malleability, 173
economic considerations, 172
elastic modulus, 172
framework, 9f
metal components, 183
titanium-based alloys, 183
Repaired amalgam restorations, 165–166
Replantation, 253
definition, 253
Repulsion force, 17
Reservoir, 307f

Residual compressive stresses, development,
223
Residual flux, 186
Residual stress, 179, 223, 224f
Resilience, 72
definition, 64
Resilient soft denture liner
care, 249
compositions, 249
definition, 233
processing, 249
purpose, 248
short-term soft liners/tissue conditioners, 249
Resin cements, 129, 151
ceramic prostheses, 146
commercial, 145f
composition, 145
dual-cured cements, 145
evaluation, 146
manipulation, 146
metallic prostheses, 146
orthodontic brackets, 125, 146
polymeric prostheses, 146
restorative composites, low-viscosity
versions, 124
self-adhesive, 124
setting, 145
solubility, 132
Resin filler particle preparation, 98f
Resin impression trays and tray materials, 250
Resin materials, advantage, 88
Resin restorative materials, 403
Resin tag, 115–116
Resin teeth
chemical bonding with denture base resins,
251
fabrication, 251
impact resistance and ductility, 251
vs. porcelain teeth, 251
wear resistance, 251
Resin-based adhesives, 46
Resin-based composites
cements, 219
classification, 93t
components, 88
composition and function, 88
coupling agent, 91
degree of conversion, 105
fillers, 90
history, 88
indication, 93t
inhibitors, 92
matrix, 89
matrix constraint, 105
optical modifiers, 92
properties, 105
restorations, 345, 345f
strengthening mechanism, 106
wear, 107
Resin-based filling material, 46
Resin-modified glass ionomer (RMGI), 124
cement, 129
clinical indications, 147
definition, 128
hybrid ionomer, 147
2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate, 148
marketing, 147
polymerization, 147

Index

Resin-modified glass-ionomer cement
(RMGIs), 147, 147f, 376–377
Resinoid-bonded abrasive, 342
Resins, 34
bonding, dental ceramics, 219
definition, 16, 88
pit/fissure sealant usage, 126
radiopacity, 56
Response-surface methods/sequential
minimum-energy design, 383
Restorations
anterior class III silicate cement, 13f
clinical assessment, 392
esthetic appearance, 11
Fédération Dentaire Internationale (FDI)
Criteria, 393b, 396b
fracture, 74
longevity, 11
Original Cvar and Ryge Criteria, 393
survival probabilities, 109
retention, 11, 11f
Restorative dental materials, 8
definition, 3
direct, 8, 9f
indirect, 8, 9f
temporary restorative, 10
Restorative dentistry, 407
Restorative glass ionomer cements, properties,
144t
Restorative materials
aging, 406
finishing and polishing benefits, 333
fracture toughness, 144t
Retentive clasp, 64, 65f
Retraction cords, 280
Retrospective studies, 392
definition, 390
Reversible hydrocolloid, 287
composition, 289, 290t
distortion, 290
sol–gel transformation, 287
Reversible materials, 276
Rheology, 50
definition, 49
Rheometric properties, 37
Rhombic lattice, 22f
Rhombohedral lattice, 22f
Rockwell hardness test, 79
Rods, 52
Roman cement, 151
Root canal sealers, 125
Rouge, 341
Rubber-bonded abrasives, 342
S
Safety Data Sheet (SDS), 368
Sag, definition, 49
Salivary genetic testing, 409
Salt, atomic arrangement, 20f
Sand, 341
Sandblasting, 341
Sandwich technique, 147
Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly
Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR),
371
Screw dislocation, 189f, 189
Sealant, 8f, 126
Secondary bonds, 19

Selective laser melting, 185
cobalt-chromium (Co-Cr) powder
compositions, 185t
Self-activating capsules, 158
Self-adhesive flowable composites, 103
Self-adhesive resin cement, 146
Self-assembling materials, 405
definition, 401
Self-diffusion, 21
Self-etch adhesives, 122f, 123
Self-healing (self-repairing) materials, 405
Sensitization, 195, 355, 361
Shape memory, 197
Shear strain, 50f, 51f
Shear stress, 66, 188f
Shear thinning, 275, 282–283
Shore hardness test, 79
Short-term soft liner (tissue conditioner)
composition, 249
definition, 233
Shrinkage, stress, 106
Silane primers, 220
Silica, allotropic forms, 42
Silica-based ceramic, silane bonding, 220f,
220
Silicate cement, 129
Silicate glass, 203
Silicon carbide, 341
Silicone
addition, 277
condensation, 277
rubbers, 252
Silicosis, 338
Silorane chemistry, 103
Silver diammine fluoride (SDF), 136
Silver-copper system, 30
equilibrium-phase diagram, 30f
phase transformations, 30, 30f
Silver-palladium alloys, 176
Simple hexagonal lattice, 22f
Single teeth (restoration), endosteal blade
implant designs (usage), 258f
Sintering, 34, 178, 202, 206
burnished foil, 184
process, 342
Sliding friction, 200
Slip, 34f, 34
Slip direction, 189
Slip plane, 34, 67, 189
Slip system, 189
Smart materials, 401
definition, 401
Smear layer, 115
Soda–lime glass, 33
Soft glass, 91
Soft wax, 302
Softening heat treatment, 176
Soft-Start, 107
Solder, 185
Soldering, 175
acetylene, heat source, 186
brazing, 185
definition, 171
filler metal, 186
fluidity, 186
flux, 185
furnace soldering, 186
gap width, 187

427

Soldering (Continued)
heat sources for, 186
natural gas, heat source, 186t
propane, heat source, 186t
stainless steel, 196
technical considerations, 196
technique considerations, 186
temperature/time, 187
torch flame, zone, 187f
wetting, 186
Sol–gel transformation, 287
Solid adhering, dentistry, 43f
Solids
electrochemical properties, 58
magnetic materials, 62
rheology, 50
solubility, conditions, 28
structural relaxation, 51
thermal properties, 57
Solid solutions, 28
definition, 16
interstitial, 28
mechanical properties, 28
phase diagram interpretation, 29
substitutional, 28
Solid-state reactions, 31
Solidus temperature, 28, 178
Solubility, 246
Solutes, 28
Solution, 28
Solution heat treatment, 176
Solvation properties, 37
Solvents, 28, 121
Solvus line, 30
Special controls, 368
Specific heat, 57
Specifications, 381, 387
Specular reflectance, 53
Spinel/spinelle, 202
Spiral wheel polishers, 342f
Spot welding, 185
Springback, definition, 171
Spring-wound casting machine, 317f
Sprue
attachment, 308
definition, 276, 306
design, 307
diameter, 308
problem, shrinkage, 308f
former connection, 308
length, 308
orientation, 308f
porosity, 308f
position, 308
primary sprue, wax pattern orientation,
307f
representation, 307f
reservoir, addition, 308
Sprued wax pattern, 307
Stabilization, 195
Stain ceramics, 202, 209
Stainless steel, 264
austenitic stainless steels, 195
carbon steel, 194
compositions, 195t
ferritic stainless steels, 195
martensitic stainless steels, 195
soldering, 196

428

Index

Stainless steel (Continued)
types, 195
welding, 196
Stainless steel alloys, 194
Stainless steel orthodontic wire, 196t
Staple bone implant, 255
Static friction, 80
Static mixing, 146, 275
design, 281f
elastomeric impression, 281
Statistical significance
vs. clinical significance, 386
definition, 381
Stem cells from apical papillae (SCAPs), 407
Step-growth polymerization, 38, 41
Step-stress accelerated lifetime testing
(SSALT), 383
Stereolithography, 330
Sticky wax, definition, 276
Sticky wax, 302–303
Stimulus-responsive “smart” materials, 405
Stock tray, 279, 279f
Stone casts and dies, 283
Strain, definition, 16, 64
Strain field, 32
Strain hardening, 71, 171, 191
definition, 64
Strength, 67
Strength, amalgam
amalgam hardening rate effects, 162
compressive and tensile strength, 161–162
condensation effects, 162
mercury content effects, 162f, 162
porosity effects, 162
trituration effects, 162
Strengthening mechanism, resin-based
composites, 106
Stress, 4
combined, 66
compressive, 65f, 66
definition, 16, 64
relief, 191
shear, 66
tensile, 65f, 66
unit, 66
Stress concentration, 34, 74
definition, 64
Stress corrosion, 61
definition, 50
Stress distribution, 66
Stress gradient, 66
Stress intensity, 64
Stress intensity factor, 75
Stress relaxation, 51
Stresses, 23
Stress-relief heat treatment, 196
Stress-strain properties, 68, 68f
Structural relaxation, 51
definition, 49
Subperiosteal implant, 254–255, 257f
definition, 253
positioning, 257f
Substitutional solid solution, 28
Substrate metal, 185
Subsurface porosity, 322f, 322
Suck-back porosity, 323f, 322
Sulfur contamination, addition silicone, 277
Supercooled liquids, 21

Supercooling, 24
Superelasticity, 171, 197
Superficial active carious lesions, 6
Superlattice, 32
Surefil-SDR flow, 403
Surface, 43f, 43
Surface defects, 74
Surface energy, 16, 43, 44t
Surface flaws, impact, 75f
Surface interactions, hardness, 78
Surface profilometry, 395
Surface tension, 16, 44
Surface-fatigue wear, 81
Surfactant, 46
Surgical implants, 260
Survival, clinical analysis, 392
Swept-source optical coherence tomography
(SS-OCT), 408
Syneresis, 275, 292
Synthetic resins, 34
Synthetic waxes, 302
Systemic effects, 356, 357f
CMR effects, 358
concept, 356, 357f
estrogenicity, 358
variables, 358
Systemic reactions
dental alloys, 373
dental amalgam, 371
methacrylates and resin composites, 372
T
Taguchi robust design, 383
Tarnish, 58
alloys, 172
definition, 50
dental amalgams, 163f, 163
impact, 30
Tartaric acid, glass-ionomer cement setting,
141f, 141
TC 106, 387–388
Tear-strength test
configurations, 285f
specimen designs, 285
Technique sensitivity, 381, 383
Teeth
biological issue, 6, 7f
genetic issue, 7f
mechanical issue, 7, 8f
movement, achievement, 197
Teeth, structure
anterior tooth and supporting tissues, 5f
cementum, 5
dentin, 5, 6f
dentin-enamel junction, 5, 6f
enamel, 4
pulp, 5
third molars, properties, 82t
Tempering, 195
Temporary restorative material, 3, 10
Tensile fracture, susceptibility, 204
Tensile strength, 161–162, 194f
Tensile stress, 65f, 66
Tensile stress-strain curve, 71f
Termination, 40f
vinyl monomers, 39
Terrometallic porcelain teeth, placement,
205

Tesla (T), 50, 63
Tetrafunctional silorane monomer, 104f
Tetragonal lattice, 22f
Tetragonal unit cell structures, 216f
Tetragonal zirconia polycrystal (TZP), 216
Texturing, 262
Theobromine, 403–404
TheraCal and TheraCal PT, 135
Thermal compatibility, 202
Thermal conductivity, 57
cement base, 136t
definition, 49
Thermal contraction coefficient (TCC),
179
Thermal diffusivity, 57
definition, 49
Thermal energy, 17
Thermal expansion, 17
gypsum-bonded investments, 310
high-heat, 315
Thermal insulation, zinc phosphate cement
(basis), 136
Thermal properties, 57
alloys, 172
polymers, 37
Thermal shrinkage, 243–244
Thermal tempering, 225
Thermally compatible metal-ceramic system,
224f
Thermally compatible systems, 211, 223
Thermo-photonic lock-in imaging (TPLI),
408
Thermoplastic polymers, 16, 37
Thermoset polymers, 16, 38f, 38
Third molars, properties, 82t
Thixotropic, definition, 49
Thixotropic fluid, viscosity, 51
Thixotropy, 275, 284
Three-body abrasion, 334f, 334
Three-dimensional (3-D) printing, 185, 328,
409
advantage, 328
model, diagnostic casts, 329f
technologies, 410f
Three-point test, 73f
Three-unit bridge, veneer ceramic chipping,
215f
Three-unit ceramic bridge
connector dimensions, 227f
lithia disilicate core ceramic, usage
(postcementation photograph),
228f
Threshold dosage, 365
Thymol, 289
Tie line, 29
Tin oxide, 341
Tissue integration, 257
Tissue engineering, 406
Tissue fluid, 61
Tissue repair/regeneration, dental materials,
12
Titanium, 404
castings, surface, 176
corrosion, 62
laboratory casting, challenge, 184
products, 264
Titanium alloys, 177
all-metal prosthesis usage, 177

Index

Titanium alloys (Continued)
American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM) F 67 unalloyed titanium,
tensile properties/impurity limits, 177t
fabrication, oxygen effect (elimination), 178
manipulation, 178
stabilizers, 177
Titanium-based alloys, 182
high-noble and base-metal alloy properties,
182t
removable partial dentures, alloys, 183
in vitro bonding tests, 182
Titanium-molybdenum alloy (TMA), 199
Tooth
contour, 64
undercut, 64
Tooth loss, 406
Tooth preparation, 280
Tooth structure
hardness values, 339t
properties, 82t
strength, 81
tensile properties, 82
Toothbrushes, 351
Torch flame, zones (division), 187
Torch melting (noble metal alloy), 318
Torch melting/centrifugal casting machine,
317
Torsion, 66
Total-etch technique, 118
Toughness, 72
definition, 64
Toxicity, 355, 358
dental amalgams, 166
Toxicology, 248
Traditional composite, 97
Transformation toughening, 202
rack propagation, 225
Transient stress, 179, 223
Translucency, 53, 92
definition, 49
Transmandibular implant (TMI), 255
Transmission, 49, 53
Transmit, 49
Transosteal implant
definition, 253
panoramic radiograph, 257f
transmucosal abutment, 257f
Transparency, 49, 53
Transplants, failure rates (recognition), 254
Tray compound, 294
Tribology, 64, 79
Tricalcium silicate product, 404
Triclinic lattice, 22f
Tri-/dicalcium silicate cements, 149
solubilities, 132
Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate
(TEGDMA), 89f
TRIOS 3, 327
Triple-tray technique, 284
Tripoli, 341
Trituration
consistency of the mix, 158, 159f
definition, 153
objective, 158
triturators, 158
True Definition Scanner, 327
True strength, 71

True stress, 71
definition, 64
True/truing, definition, 332
Tungsten-carbide burs, 111
Tungsten-inert gas (TIG) arc, 185
Twin, 191
Twinning, 191, 193f
Twinning plane, 191
Two single-paste systems, compomer, 148f
Two-body abrasion, 334f, 334
Two-body abrasive wear, 81
Two-putty system, 281
U
Ultimate strength, 71
Ultralow-fusing ceramics, 207
Ultrasonography, 409
Undercooling, 24
Uniaxial flexural strength, 73, 73f
Unit cells, 20
cubic space lattices, 21f
Universal bonding agents, 145
Urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA), 90
chemical structure, 89f
U.S. Public Health Service Guidelines
(USPHS), 392
Usage tests, 366
Utility wax, 303
V
Vacancy
definition, 21
example, 189f
Vacuum mixing, 313
Valence, 28
Valence electrons, 16
Value
definition, 49, 54
Munsell scale, 54f
van der Waals forces
definition, 16, 19
dipole attraction, 19f, 19
Varnish, 129
definition, 128
flavored fluoride, 136f
fluoridated, 135
infection control, 135
Veneered crown, 217f
Veneered leucite-based glass-ceramic core
restorations, 213
Veneering ceramics (layering ceramics), 207
compositions, 208t
expansion and contraction coefficient, 207
properties, 230t
tensile strength, 227
Venus Diamond (Kulzer), 103
Vickers hardness number (VHN), 173
Vickers hardness test, 79
Vinyl monomers
addition polymerization, stages, 39
induction, 39
propagation, 39
termination, 39
Vinyl plastisols, 251
Vinyl polysiloxane (VPS) impression material,
277
Virtual reality (VR), 326, 331
Viscoelastic materials, 284

429

Viscoelastic strain, 37, 37f
Viscoelastic/viscoelasticity, 275
Viscosity, 50
definition, 49
fluids, 51f, 51
shear strain, 50f
Vision
phenomenon, 52
role, 52
VITA In-Ceram Alumina, 218
Vita shade guide, 55f
VITA Zahnfabrick, porcelain development,
206
VITABLOCS Triluxe Forte (VITA
Zahnfabrik) ceramic, 221
Vitapan classical shade guide, tab
arrangements, 55f
Vitreous-bond materials, 342
VM 9 Ceramics, 222t
Voids, 245f, 245
Voltage (V), 59
Volumetric shrinkage, 243
Voxel, definition, 401
Vulcanization, 377
W
Water
density/thermal properties, 57t
gypsum products, 299
sorption, 245
Water/powder (W/P) ratio
compressive strength, 299f
plaster of paris
setting expansion, 299t
strength, 304t
Water-settable glass ionomer, 141
Wax., 275. See also Dental waxes
baseplate, 303
bite, 303
boxing, 303
carnauba, 302
casting, 303, 314
corrective, 303
dipping, 302
elastic memory, 305
elimination and heating, 314
impression, 303
inlay, 302, 304
microcrystalline, 302
mineral-based, 302
Montan, 302
natural, 302
pattern, 302
processing, 303
sticky, 303
synthetic, 302
utility, 303
Wax patterns
cleaner, 313
distortion, 307
primary sprue, 307f
removal, 308
and sprue design, 307
sprued, 307
Wear, 107
abrasive, 81
adhesive, 80
analysis, 393

430

Index

Wear (Continued)
cavitation-erosion, 81
corrosive, 81
debris, 334
definition, 80
direct method, 395, 395f
erosion, 81
fretting, 81
indirect method, 391f, 393, 394f
micro-CT scan, 395f
resistance improvement, 81
surface-fatigue, 81
types of, 80
Weibull distribution, 77, 78f
Weibull modulus, 77
Weibull size effect
conversion of specimen strengths, 386,
387f
effective volume, 386
specimen size, 385
Weibull distribution, 385
Weibull modulus, 386f, 386
Welding, 171
beta-titanium wires, 199
stainless steel, 196
Wet corrosion, 59
Wet strength, gypsum products, 299
Wetting
adhesion, 44, 116
contact angle, 45, 46f
definition, 16
Wetting agent, 16, 46
White spot lesions (WSLs), 6
White stone, 341

Whitening toothpastes, 350
Work hardening, 71
definition, 64
Working range, 171
Working time, 237
Wrought alloys, 171–172, 188
annealing effects, 193
dentistry, 194
plastic deformation, 188
recovery, 193
types of, 193
Wrought structure, cast structure, 196
X
Xenoestrogens, 355, 358
X-ray energy, absorption, 56
X-rays, spectrum placement, 56
Y
Yield point, 69
Yield strength, 69, 172
definition, 64
Young’s modulus, 70
definition, 64
Yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia polycrystal
(Y-TZP) ceramic
hydrothermal degradation, 218
physical properties, 219t
transformation toughening, 217f
Yttria-stabilized zirconia, 202
Z
Zinc oxide, definition, 128
Zinc oxide eugenol, 140

Zinc oxide (ZnO) powder, 129
Zinc oxide–based cements, 138
Zinc oxide–eugenol (ZOE), 129, 294,
294f
consistency, 295
dimensional stability, 295
root canal sealers, solubilities, 132
setting reaction, 294f, 294
Zinc phosphate cement, 129, 131, 136
bismuth oxide, 139
definition, 128
mixing, 139
thermal insulation, 136
Zinc polycarboxylate cement, 139
powder#liquid ratio, 140
setting time, 140
working time, 140
Zirconia, 214
core materials, veneering ceramics
(properties), 230t
fracture strength, 217
monolithic, 217
stabilized, 214
transformation toughening, 225
yttria stabilization, 202
Zirconia reinforced lithia silicate, 328
Zirconia-toughened alumina (ZTA),
219
physical properties, 219t
Zirconium dioxide
ceramics, 214
mechanical properties, 203
Zirconium oxide, 341
Zirconium silicate, 341

