6

Bonding and Bonding Agents
OUTLINE
Historical Background

Dentin-Bonding Agents

Mechanisms of Adhesion

Luting Agents

Acid-Etch Technique

Applications in Orthodontic, Endodontic, and Preventive Dentistry

Process and Procedural Factors

KEY TERMS
Acid-etching/acid-etch technique The process of cleaning
and roughening a solid surface by exposing it to an acid and
thoroughly rinsing the residue to promote micromechanical
bonding of an adhesive to the surface.
Adhesion A molecular or atomic attraction between two contacting
surfaces promoted by the interfacial force of attraction between
the molecules or atoms of two different materials. Adhesion may
occur as chemical adhesion (formation of covalent bonds, hydrogen
bonds, or polar bonds via van der Waals attraction), mechanical
adhesion (structural interlocking), or a combination of both types.
Cement/cementing Substance that hardens from a viscous state
to a solid union between two surfaces. For dental applications,
cements act as a base, liner, restorative filling material, or adhesive to bond devices and prostheses to tooth structure or to
each other. See also Luting agent.
Contact angle Angle of intersection between a liquid and a surface
of a solid that is measured from the solid surface through the liquid
to the liquid–vapor tangent line originating at the terminus of the
liquid–solid interface; used as a measure of wettability, whereby
absolutely no wetting occurs at a contact angle of 180 degrees and
complete wetting occurs at an angle of 0 degrees.
Dentin-bonding agent A thin layer of resin between conditioned
dentin and the resin matrix of a resin-based composite restorative material.

Dentin conditioner An acidic agent that dissolves the inorganic
structure in dentin, resulting in a collagen mesh that allows
infiltration of an adhesive resin.
Hybrid layer An intermediate layer of resin, collagen, and dentin
that is produced by acid-etching of dentin and infiltration of
resin into the conditioned dentin.
Luting agent A viscous, cement-like material that also fills a gap
between the bonded materials. It originally referred to nonadhesive agents only but now also includes adhesive agents.
Microleakage The flow of oral fluid and bacteria into the microscopic gap between a prepared tooth surface and a restorative material.
Obturation In endodontic dentistry, filling of a root canal completely and densely with a nonirritating hermetic sealing agent
to prevent leakage.
Primer A hydrophilic, low-viscosity resin that promotes bonding
to a moist substrate, such as dentin.
Resin tag Extension of resin that has penetrated into etched
enamel or dentin. Resin tags form micromechanical interlocks
analogous to screw threads.
Smear layer Poorly adherent layer of ground dentin produced by
cutting a dentin surface; also, a tenacious deposit of microscopic debris that covers enamel and dentin surfaces that have been
prepared for a restoration.

Bonding and adhesion comprise a complex set of physical, chemical, and mechanical mechanisms that allow the attachment and binding of one substance to another. A dental bonding system performs
three essential functions: (1) provides resistance to separation of an
adherend substrate (i.e., enamel, dentin, metal, composite, ceramic)
from a restorative or cementing material; (2) distributes stress along
bonded interfaces; and (3) seals the interface via adhesive bonding
between dentin and/or enamel and the bonded material, thus increasing resistance to microleakage and decreasing the risk for postoperative sensitivity, marginal staining, and secondary caries. The science of
adhesion has been covered in Chapter 2, Adhesion and Bonding. In
this chapter, only those principles needed to understand dental bonding are discussed.

Historical Background
In 1949, Oskar Hagger, at the De Trey division of Amalgamated
Dental, developed the first dental adhesive for dentin, Sevritron
Cavity Seal. This system comprised glycerophosphoric acid
dimethacrylate, which should have made it a self-etching adhesive
for both enamel and dentin by the discussion later. However, this
product had very limited clinical durability because of the large
interfacial stresses caused by the high polymerization shrinkage
stress and high thermal expansion of the unfilled methacrylatebased resins used at the time.
Later, Michael Buonocore investigated the use of strong acids and
discovered that phosphoric acid provides superior enamel etching,
115

116

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Nonbonded
composites

1960

Acid-etching and
enamel bonding

1970

Dentin-bonded
composites

1980

3-Step , 2-step, 1-step
Dentin bonding systems

1990

Current
time

2000

Buonocore Bowen introduces
Fusayama pioneers Nakabayashi describes Kanka introduces
reports acid- NPG-GMA as the
total-etch of dentin resin infiltration of
technique of wet
etching of
1st-generation dentin and enamel
dentin bonding
dentin collagen to
enamel
bonding agent
form a “hybrid” layer

2010

2020

Self-etching and
self-adhesive bonding
systems developed

• Figure 6-1 Major turning points and events in dental bonding technologies.

and it is still in use today. As shown in Figure 6-1, Buonocore’s
discovery of acid-etching led to the ability to produce clean, highenergy, roughened enamel surfaces capable of establishing a durable
micromechanical retentive interface with resin-based cements and
restorative materials, which launched the current era of adhesive dentistry. This led to burgeoning growth in the development of adhesive
materials and bonding techniques, as summarized in Figure 6-1 and
discussed in detail in several later sections of this chapter.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Is good wetting of tooth structure by a dental adhesive adequate for longterm adhesive bonding of a restorative material?

Mechanisms of Adhesion
A means of true adhesion bonding (i.e., through chemical attraction
and/or micromechanical interlocking) has been sought for decades
and has recently been realized. For true adhesion of restorative
materials to tooth structure, three conditions must be satisfied:
1. Sound tooth structure must be conserved
2. Optimal retention must be achieved
3. Microleakage must be prevented
Dental hard tissues and their environment are complex. However, the fundamental mechanism of adhesion to tooth structure
can be regarded as an exchange by which mineral tooth material (hydroxyapatite) is replaced by synthetic resins. This process
involves two steps: (1) removing hydroxyapatite to create micropores and (2) infiltration of resin monomers into the micropores
and subsequent polymerization. As a result, resin tags form that
micromechanically interlock (or interpenetrate) with the hard tissue. There may also be chemical interactions with the tooth substrate if monomers having acidic or chelating functional groups
are present. In general, the following factors can play major or
minor roles in achieving adhesive bonds:
1. Surface energy and wetting
2. Interpenetration (formation of a hybrid zone)
3. Micromechanical interlocking
4. Chemical bonding
Wetting is the essential first step for the success of all adhesion
mechanisms. An adhesive cannot form micromechanical interlocks, chemical bonds, or interpenetrating networks with a surface
unless it can form intimate contact with the surface, spread over it,
displace air pockets, and penetrate by capillary attraction into any
microscopic and submicroscopic irregularities. These conditions
are, by definition, achieved if the adhesive wets the surface.
As explained in Chapter 2, Contact Angle of Wetting, the wettability of a liquid on a solid can be characterized by the contact

angle that forms between a liquid and solid, as measured within
the liquid. Categories of wettability include “absolutely no wetting”
(contact angle of 180 degrees), “mostly nonwetting” (>90 degrees),
“mostly wetting” (<90 degrees), and absolute wetting (0 degrees).
See Figure 2-40 for a schematic illustration of wetting situations.
Wetting is essential for intraoral adhesion but is not sufficient
to ensure durable bonding. To achieve strong bonding through
the micromechanical interlocking mechanism, wetting monomers
must intimately adapt to enamel and fill enamel surface irregularities and/or infiltrate into a demineralized collagen network in
dentin. Some acid monomers with a phosphate (e.g., phenyl-P)
or carboxyl group (e.g., 4-MET) have the additional potential of
forming chemical bonds with calcium in the residual tooth tissue.
Specific monomers with these types of functional groups will be
discussed later.
Generally, wettability can be enhanced by increasing the
surface energy of the substrates (e.g., dentin, enamel, and
synthetic materials such as ceramics). Because a clean, microroughened tooth surface has higher surface energy than unprepared tooth surfaces, organic adhesives are inherently able to
wet and spread over such a surface unless a low-surface-tension
material contaminates the surface before the adhesive can be
applied. The acid-etch technique, by which contaminants
are removed and microporosities are created, is widely used to
generate high-energy tooth surfaces and promote wetting by
adhesive monomers.

Acid-Etch Technique
Whenever both enamel and dentin tissues are mechanically cut,
especially with a rotary instrument, a layer of loosely held debris
and organic film known as a smear layer is left on their surfaces
and prevents strong bonding. Different quantities and qualities of
smear layer are produced by various cutting and instrumentation
techniques, which play an important role in both restorative and
endodontic treatments, as explained further in Chapter 7, Clinical
Manipulation. In dentin, the smear layer becomes burnished into
the underlying dentinal tubules and lowers dentin permeability,
which is a protective effect. However, it is also a very weakly cohesive material and thus detaches easily, consequently interfering
with strong bonding. Thus various cleaning or treatment agents
and procedures must be employed to remove the smear layer and
expose the intact substrate for bonding. As explained in greater
detail in the discussion that follows, acid-etching is used to remove
the smear layer from both enamel and dentin. Alternatively, in
dentin, the smear layer can be left partially in place and modified
such that adhesive resins penetrate through it and bond to the
intact dentin structures below.

CHAPTER 6

Bonding and Bonding Agents

117

• Figure 6-2 Surface of etched enamel in which the centers of enamel
rods have been preferentially dissolved by phosphoric acid. (Courtesy
K-J Söderholm.)

• Figure 6-3 Scanning electron microscopy image of tags formed by the

Enamel Etching
The first meaningful demonstration of intraoral adhesion was
reported by Michael Buonocore (Figure 6-1). He etched enamel
surfaces with various acids, placed an acrylic restorative material
on the micromechanically roughened surfaces, and found a substantial increase in the resin–enamel-bond strength (~20 MPa).
One of the surface-conditioning agents he used, phosphoric acid,
is still the most widely used etchant for bonding to both enamel
and dentin. Depending on the concentration, phosphoric acid
removes the smear layer and about 10 microns of enamel to expose
prisms of enamel rods and create a honeycomb-like, high-energy
retentive surface (Figure 6-2). The higher surface energy ensures
that resin monomers will readily wet the surface, infiltrate into
the micropores, and polymerize to form resin tags (Figure 6-3).
The pattern of etching enamel may vary from selective dissolution of either the enamel rod centers (type I etching), as shown in
Figure 6-2, or the peripheral areas (type II etching), as indicated
by the resin tags in Figure 6-3. In either case, the resin tags are
about 6 μm in diameter and 10 to 20 μm in length.
Prior to the introduction of enamel acid-etching and the use of
enamel-bonding agents, restorative materials were placed directly
on the smear layer of the prepared tooth. It is evident that the apparent bond strength measured would be the cohesive strength of the
smear layer to the tooth structure. As a result, debonding and leakage of oral fluids within the microscopic space between prepared
teeth and restorative materials was an ongoing problem. Stronger
and longer-lasting bonds result if the smear layer is removed because
resins can then directly bond to the intact hard tissue.

Dentin Etching
As illustrated in Figure 6-1, dentin etching did not gain wide acceptance until Fusayama introduced the total-etch concept in 1979.
For this method, both dentin and enamel are etched simultaneously,
typically using 37% phosphoric acid. His study demonstrated that
not only was retention substantially increased, but also pulp damage
did not occur, as had been generally assumed. A subsequent study
by Nakabayashi et al. revealed that hydrophilic resins can infiltrate

penetration of resin into etched areas of enamel. The resin was applied to
the etched enamel, and enamel was then dissolved by acid to reveal the
tags (×5000). (Courtesy K-J Söderholm.)

the surface layer of acid-demineralized collagen fibers produced in
etched dentin and form a layer of resin-infiltrated dentin with high
cohesive strength. Such a hybrid layer structure forms very strong
resin bonds through the development of an interpenetrating network of polymer and dentinal collagen, together with numerous
micromechanical interlocks at the resin–hybrid layer interface. By
the early 1990s, dentin etching had gained worldwide acceptance.
Because the total-etch technique usually involves etching with an
acid followed by rinsing to remove the acid, this technique is also
known as the etch-and-rinse technique.
Dentin etching is more technique sensitive than enamel etching because of the complexity of the dentin structure. Dentin
consists of 50 vol% (volume percentage) of calcium phosphate
mineral (hydroxyapatite), 30 vol% of organic material (mainly
type I collagen), and 20 vol% fluid. Acid-etching removes
hydroxyapatite almost completely from several microns of sound
dentin, exposing a microporous network of collagen suspended
in water. Whereas etched enamel must be completely dry to form
a strong bond with hydrophobic adhesive resins, etched dentin
must be moist to form a hybrid layer. The amount of water left
in etched dentin is critical. If insufficient water is present, the
collagen network will collapse and produce a relatively impermeable layer that prevents resin infiltration and subsequent hybridization. If too much water remains, resin infiltration cannot fully
replace the water in the collagen network and, consequently, sets
the condition for later leakage into those locations. Therefore a
priming step is required to maintain a hydrated collagen network while removing excess water (see details in the following
sections).

Process and Procedural Factors
Several aspects of the total-etch, etch-and-rinse, and related techniques
are critical to the success or failure of bonding systems, as discussed next.

118

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Etching Time

Dentin-Bonding Agents

The optimal application time for the etchant may vary somewhat,
depending on previous exposure of the tooth surface to fluoride
and other factors. For example, a permanent tooth with high fluoride content may require a longer etching time, as do primary
teeth. In the latter, increased surface conditioning time is needed
to enhance the etching pattern on primary tooth enamel that is
more aprismatic than permanent tooth enamel. Currently, the
etching time for most etching gels is approximately 15 seconds.
The advantage of such short etching times is that they yield
acceptable bond strength in most instances while conserving
enamel and reducing treatment time.

Dental-bonding agents are designed to provide a sufficiently
strong interface between restorative composites and tooth structure to withstand mechanical forces and shrinkage stress. The success of adhesives is dependent on two types of bonding:
1. Micromechanical interlocking, chemical bonding of the
bonding agent with enamel and dentin, or both
2. Copolymerization of the bonding resin with the resin matrix
of composite materials
Until the total-etch technique was adopted, bonding agents
were used only to enhance the wetting and adaptation of resin
to conditioned enamel surfaces. These bonding agents are made
by combining various dimethacrylates used in resin composites
(e.g., bis-GMA) with diluting monomers (e.g., triethylene glycol
dimethacrylate [TEGDMA]; Figure 6-4) to control viscosity and
to enhance wetting. These agents have little or no potential for
chemical bonding, but they improve micromechanical bonding
by optimal formation of resins tags within the etched enamel.
Because enamel can be kept fairly dry, these rather hydrophobic
resins perform well as long as they are restricted to enamel. They
are generally called enamel-bonding agents.
Since the inception of the total-etch concept, in which both
dentin and enamel are etched simultaneously, enamel-bonding
agents have been replaced by the same systems that are used on
dentin. The benefit is the ability to simultaneously bond resin
to both enamel and dentin, leading to substantial improvements
in bond strength. Numerous chemistries have been investigated,
developed, and marketed in the search for adhesive systems that
can produce strong, permanent bonds to dentin. Therefore the
focus of discussion is on dentin-bonding agents.
As discussed in the section on adhesion in Chapter 2, Bonding
to Tooth Structure, and in an earlier section of this chapter, a successful dentin-bonding system must meet several requirements:
1. Adequate removal or dissolution of the smear layer from
enamel and dentin
2. Maintenance or reconstitution of the dentin collagen matrix
3. Good wetting and efficient monomer penetration into the
collagen matrix
4. Polymerization within the collagen mesh to form a hybrid
layer
5. Copolymerization with the resin composite matrix

Rinsing and Drying Stage
Once the tooth is etched, the acid should be rinsed away thoroughly with a stream of water for about 20 seconds, and the
water must be removed. When enamel alone is etched and is to
be bonded with a hydrophobic resin (e.g., bisphenol-A glycidyl
dimethacrylate [bis-GMA]–based resin; see Chapter 5, Composition and Function), it must be dried completely with warm air
until it takes on a white, frosted appearance. Dentin, in contrast,
cannot withstand such aggressive drying, which would cause
bond failure because of the formation of impermeable, collapsed
collagen fibers. In the total-etch technique, a dentin-bonding
agent and primer must be used that are compatible with both
moist dentin and moist enamel.

Cleanness of the Bonding Surfaces
To form a sound mechanical bond, etched surfaces must be kept
free of contamination and sufficiently dry until the resin is placed.
Although etching raises the surface energy, contamination can
readily reduce the energy level of the etched surface. Reducing the
surface energy, in turn, makes it more difficult to wet the surface
with a bonding resin that may have too high of a surface tension
to wet the contaminated surface. Thus even momentary contact
with saliva or blood can prevent effective resin-tag formation and
severely reduce bond strength. Another potential contaminant is
oil that is released from the air compressor and transported along
the air lines to the air–water syringe. If contamination occurs, the
contaminant should be removed, and the surface should be etched
again for 10 seconds.

Other Factors
The acid-etch technique was not widely used in the years immediately following its introduction (Figure 6-1). The principal reason was the inferior properties of the unfilled acrylic restorative
materials used at that time. With those resins, high polymerization shrinkage (>6 vol%) and coefficients of thermal expansion
in excess of 100 ppm/°C generated interfacial stresses sufficient
to rupture the bond to etched enamel. After highly filled resinbased composites were marketed beginning in the mid-1960s, the
acid-etch technique was “rediscovered.” Therefore, the choice of
restorative materials also plays an important factor in the success
of bonding.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What types of bond formation result from the use of dentin-bonding agents?

Composition of Dentin-Bonding Agents
Irrespective of the number of components (see Table 6-1), a typical
dentin-bonding system includes etchants, primers, solvents, resin
monomers, initiators and inhibitors, reinforcing fillers, and sometimes other functional ingredients such as antimicrobial agents.

Etchants
Enamel and dentin etchants are strong acids (pH = 1 to 2) used
to remove smear layers and to dissolve the mineral phase so as to
form micromechanical interlocking. A number of acidic agents
have been used to produce the required microporosity. However,
phosphoric acid, typically at 37%, produces consistent etching
patterns while not damaging the pulp. Phosphoric acid concentrations greater than 50% result in the deposition of monocalcium
phosphate monohydrate on the etched surface, which inhibits further dissolution. The etchant is usually supplied as an aqueous gel
to allow precise placement over a specific area. Brushes are used to
place the acidic gel, or the acid may be supplied in a disposable

Bonding and Bonding Agents

CHAPTER 6

Monomers with surface active and/or adhesive functional groups
HEMA
H2C

CH3

C

O CH2

CO

CH2

OH

HEMA-phosphate
H2C

CH3

C

OH

CO

O CH2

CH2

P

O

OH

O
Phenyl-P
H2C

CH3

C

OH

CO

O CH2

CH2

O

O

10-MDP
H2 C

O

P

CH3

C

OH

CO

O CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

O

P

OH

O

4-MET
H 2C

C

CH3
CO

O CH2

CH2

O

CO

COOH
COOH

4-META
H2C

CH3

C

O

CO

O CH2

CH2

O CO

C
C

MAC-10
H2C

O

CH3

C

O

O CH2

CO

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH

CH2

N

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2 CH

COOH
COOH

Methacrylamide
H2 C

C

CH3
CO

NH2

NPG-GMA
H2C

C

CH3
CO

O CH2

CH2 COOH

OH

CH3
Monomers with crosslinking and copolymerizing functions
Bis-GMA
H2C

C

CH3
CO

CH3

CH3
O CH2

CH

CH2

O

O CH2

C

CH2 O OC

C

CH2

OH

CH3

OH

CH

UDMA
H2 C

C

CH3
CO

O CH2 CH2 O CO NH CH2

CH

CH3

CH3

CH3
CH2

C

CH2 CH2 NH

CO O

CH2

CH2

CH3
TEGDMA
H2 C

C

CH3

CH3
CO

O CH2 CH2 O

CH2

CH2

O

CH2 CH2

O

OC

C

CH2

• Figure 6-4 Structures of representative monomers used in enamel- and dentin-bonding agents.

O

OC

C

CH2

119

120

PA RT I I

TABLE 6-1

Direct Restorative Materials

Classification of Dental Bonding Systems and Representative Examples of Commercial Products
Currently Available for Clinical Use
ETCH AND RINSE

SELF-ETCH

Three Step (4th generation)

Two Step (5th generation)

Two Step (6th generation)

One Step (7th generation)

1. Etch
Apply for 15 s, rinse 15 s, gently airdry, while keeping dentin moist.

1. Etch
Apply for 15 s, rinse 15 s, gently airdry while keeping dentin moist.

1. Etch and prime
One application without rinsing, gently
air-dry.

1. Etch, prime, and bond
Apply 1–5 layers without rinsing,
gently air-dry, light-cure.

2. Prime
Apply 1–5 layers, gently air-dry.

2. Prime and bond
Apply 1–5 layers, gently air-dry,
light-cure.

2. Bond
Apply one layer, gently air-dry, light-cure.

3. Bond
Apply one layer, gently air-dry, light-cure.

REPRESENTATIVE PRODUCTS CURRENTLY MARKETED FOR CLINICAL USE
Adper Scotchbond Multi-Purpose
(3M ESPE)
Syntac (Ivoclar Vivadent)
DenTASTIC All-Purpose (Pulpdent)
GLUMA Solid Bond (Heraeus Kulzer)
Optibond FL (Kerr)

DenTASTIC UNO (Pulpdent)
ExciTE F VivaPen
(Ivoclar Vivadent)
iBond Total Etch (Heraeus Kulzer)
One-Step and also One-step Plus
(Bisco)
Prime & Bond NT (Dentsply)

Adper Prompt (3M ESPE)
AdheSE (Ivoclar Vivadent)
All-Bond SE (Bisco)
Clearfil SE Protect Bond (Kuraray)
Nano-Bond (Pentron)
One-Step Plus with/ Tyrian SPE (Bisco)
Peak SE with Universal Bond (Ultradent)

AdheSE Universal (Ivoclar Vivadent)
Adper Easy Bond Self Etch (3M ESPE)
Adper Prompt L-Pop (3M ESPE)
Clearfil S3 Bond (Kuraray)
Futurabond DC (VOCO)
G-Bond (GC), and XENO V (Dentsply)
i-Bond Self Etch (Heraeus Kulzer)

syringe from which it can be expressed onto enamel and dentin.
During placement, it is important to be aware of the risk of air
bubbles being introduced at the interface because the regions with
air pockets will not be etched.

Primers
Dentin etching is highly technique sensitive because the demineralized collagen network readily collapses when dried. Therefore
priming is necessary to maintain an expanded collagen network
while removing residual water to allow for the infiltration of the
hydrophobic adhesive monomer. Primers are solutions containing
hydrophilic (water-loving) monomers dissolved in a solvent, such
as acetone, ethanol, or water. Such monomers exhibit hydrophilic
properties through phosphate, phosphonate, carboxylic acid, alcohol, or ester functional groups (Figure 6-4). For example, 2-hydroxylethyl methacrylate (HEMA) is a widely used primer monomer
because of its high hydrophilicity (resulting from its −OH group)
and solvent-like nature.
It was believed that dentin bonding could be achieved by forming chemical bonds between a primer and either the inorganic or
the organic components of dentin, in particular, the Ca2+ within
the hydroxyapatite mineral phases of dentin. Phosphate and carboxylic groups form chelation bonds with Ca2+ and, therefore, are
expected to form such bonds during dentin priming, as has been
found with carboxylate-based cements (Chapter 7, Glass-Ionomer
Cement) and as illustrated in Figure 6-5, along with a bonding
mechanism by amino-carboxylate functional groups. On the same
molecule, there should be a polymerizable functional group, such
as methacrylate, that can react with the resin adhesive and thereby
form a chemical bond between the adhesive and dentin. This
approach appeared in Hagger’s dentin-bonding system, which
was glycerophosphoric acid dimethacrylate with a typical M–R–X
structure (Figure 6-6, A).
The design of such dentin-bonding agents is based on the successful model of silane coupling agents, as used to bond the inorganic
filler to the matrix resin in composites (see Figure 5-4), to bond porcelain laminate veneers through resin cements to acid-etched enamel,

Phosphate-based bonding agent

Amino-carboxylate-based bonding agent
(NPG-GMA)

Carboxylate-based bonding agent
(PAA)

• Figure 6-5 Chemical bonding mechanisms to hard tooth tissues
through calcium salt formation with monomers having adhesive functional
groups. (Courtesy K-J Söderholm.)

CHAPTER 6

CH3
O
OH

O
H2C

CH3

P

C
O

OH

O

O

C

H2C

O

A

M

R

X

CH3
O
H2C

CH3

O
H2
C

C

CH3

Si
C
H2

C
H2

O
O

CH3

O

B

M

R

X

• Figure 6-6 M–R–X structures of dentin-bonding agents. A, Glycerophosphoric acid dimethacrylate. The chemical adhesion or bonding mechanism of phosphoric acid is shown in Figure 6-5. B, γ-Methacryloxypropyl
trimethoxysilane. The surface interaction or bonding mechanism of the
silane is shown in Figure 5-4.

and to repair fractured porcelain with composites (Chapter 10,
Bonding of Resin to Dental Ceramics). Figure 6-6, B shows
a silane coupling agent presented as an M–R–X structure. X
represents a group capable of chemically reacting with siliceous
materials such as glass and silicate filler particles in composites,
porcelain crowns and veneers, and/or the calcium ions (Ca2+)
in dental hard tissues. R is a spacer group that provides flexibility and mobility, and thus enhanced reactivity, for the M
group after the X group has been immobilized by reaction at
a surface. M represents an unsaturated methacrylate group or
groups capable of copolymerizing with the other monomers of
a resin cement or composite and thereby forming a chemical
bond between the adhesive and dentin. Several compounds that
are believed to possess these properties are shown in Figure 6-4:
NPG-GMA (a condensation product of N-phenyl glycine and
glycidyl methacrylate and the first-generation dentin-bonding
agent), polymerizable phosphates (e.g., 2-[methacryloyloxyethyl]
phenyl hydrogen phosphate [phenyl-P] and 10-methacryloyloxydecyl dihydrogen phosphate [10-MDP]), and carboxylate compounds (e.g., 4-methacryloyloxyethyl trimellitic
acid [4-MET], 11-methacryloyloxy-1,1′-undecanedicarboxylic
acid [MAC-10], and 4-methacryloyloxyethyl trimellitic anhydride [4-META]). A number of phosphonic acid acrylates
and bis(acrylamide), which are resistant to water degradation (hydrolysis), form a more durable, longer-lasting bond
(e.g., AdheSE Primer; see Table 6-1). Also in this category are
poly(alkenoic) acids as used in carboxylate and glass-ionomer
cements, which are discussed later in this chapter and in more
detail in Chapter 7, Glass-Ionomer Cement.
Primer mixtures have a wide pH range because of the acidity
of various functional monomers incorporated to promote bonding to the tooth structure. The rank of functional groups in their
acidity is as follows: sulfonic acid > phosphonic > phosphoric >

Bonding and Bonding Agents

121

carboxylic > alcohol. If the concentration of acidic monomers is
increased in a HEMA base, a primer formulation may reach a pH
(e.g., 1–2) low enough to remove smear layers and etch underlying
dentin. If a primer has the ability to both etch and prime, it is categorized as a self-etching primer. For this purpose, acidic monomers
are frequently used to formulate self-etching primers. Representatives of these are shown in Figure 6-4: HEMA-phosphate, phenyl-P,
10-MDP, 4-MET, 4-META, and MAC-10.
In spite of theoretical evidence that chemical bonding to tooth
structure is possible, no convincing experimental evidence has yet
been validated to prove that significant chemical bonding occurs
between dentin adhesives and tooth structure under intraoral conditions. Rather, the adhesive functional groups facilitate surface
cleaning and etching and the development of micromechanical
interlocking and monomer penetration of dentin to form a hybrid
layer of molecular entanglements between collagen and polymer,
as described previously.

Solvents
Solvents also play important roles in priming systems. The most
commonly used solvents are water, ethanol, and acetone. In addition to enhancing the wetting of hydrophilic dentin, each solvent
is chosen to make a specific contribution to improve bond adhesion. Water can ionize acidic monomers as well as re-expand the
collapsed collagen network and make a hybrid layer possible. Ethanol and acetone have better miscibility with relatively hydrophobic monomers, and their “water-chasing” ability facilitates water
removal. Removing solvent before proceeding to the next step is
critical for a durable bond.
Adhesives
For dentin bonding, the primary purpose of adhesives is to fill the
interfibrillar space of the collagen network, creating a hybrid layer
with resin tags to provide micromechanical retention upon polymerization and serve as an intermediary bonding to the restorative
materials made of hydrophobic resins. This function is similar to
the role of enamel-bonding agents as an intermediate layer between
the etched enamel and the resin-based restorative material. Likewise, the adhesive layers of a dentin-bonding system should also
prevent fluid leakage along the restorative material’s margin.
It is evident that adhesives need to be hydrophobic so that oral
fluids will be repelled and not permeate through the intermediate
layer. At the same time, adhesives require a certain hydrophilicity
to diffuse into the hydrophilic primer-wetted dentin. To achieve
these two conflicting requirements, adhesive resins are typically
composed mainly of hydrophobic dimethacrylates, such as bisGMA, TEGDMA, and urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA), and a
small amount of a hydrophilic monomer such as HEMA. Monomers with phosphonic acid and methacrylamide functional groups
could be added to improve resistance to hydrolytic degradation
of the adhesives; however, the focus has mostly been on improving hydrolytic degradation of the one-step self-etching adhesives,
which are discussed later.
Initiators
Similar initiator systems are used in both adhesives and restorative
composites (Chapter 5, Classification by Curing Method). Polymerization can be initiated either through a photoinitiator system
consisting of a photosensitizer (e.g., camphorquinone) and a coinitiator (e.g., tertiary amine), a self-cure system that includes a
chemical initiator (e.g., benzoyl peroxide), or a dual-cure initiator
system.

122

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Etch and rinse adhesives

Three-step
(4th-generation)

Self-etch adhesives

Two-step
(6th-generation)
Conditioner

Primer

Self-etching primer

Adhesive resin

Two-step
(5th-generation)

or

One-step
(7th-generation)
Conditioner

Combined primeradhesive resin

Adhesive resin

Self-etching primer/
adhesive
two components

Self-etching adhesive
one component

• Figure 6-7 Classification of current adhesive systems according to van Meerbeek et al. (2003).
(Adapted from Cardoso MV, et al: Current aspects on bonding effectiveness and stability in adhesive
dentistry, Aust Dent J 56[S1]:31–44, 2011.)

Filler Particles
Nanometer-sized silica particles have been added to some adhesives to reinforce the adhesive and thereby produce higher bond
strengths. However, the strengthening effect of the fillers in
adhesives is uncertain because it is not clear whether these fillers
can actually penetrate into the demineralized collagen networks
because the interfibrillar space of the collagen networks is within
the range of 20 nanometers (nm), whereas the nano-sized reinforcing filler particles are in the 40-nm range. The other reason for
the addition of fillers is to effectively modify adhesive viscosity to
a thicker, pastier consistency. When such an adhesive is applied to
an etched dental surface, it yields a thicker bonding layer that can
promote increased bond strength by preventing oxygen inhibition. Moreover, a thick adhesive layer can reduce shrinkage stress
because it is more compliant, which relieves shrinkage-induced
stresses, compared with restorative composites (Chapter 5, Function of Fillers).
Other Ingredients
Additional ingredients are used with dentin-bonding agents for a
variety of specific purposes. Examples include the following: glutaraldehyde (Probond, Dentsply, York, PA) is added as a desensitizer. The monomers 12-methacryloyloxydodecylpyridinium
bromide (MDPB; Clearfil Protect Bond, Kuraray America, New
York, NY) and paraben (Adper Prompt L-Pop, 3M ESPE, St.
Paul, MN) are used as antimicrobials. Fluoride (Prime & Bond
NT, Dentsply, York, PA) is added to prevent secondary caries.
Benzalkonium chloride (e.g., Etch 37, Bisco, Schaumburg, IL)
and chlorhexidine (e.g., Peak LC Bond Resin, Ultradent Products,
South Jordon, UT) are used to prevent collagen degradation. In
laboratory studies, both benzalkonium chloride and chlorhexidine
have been shown to prevent protease enzymes (matrix metalloprotease enzymes or proteins [MMPs]) from being activated and
subsequently denaturing the hybrid-layer collagen. Unfortunately,
however, clinical studies have failed to show improved dentinbond durability after treatment with these agents.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are dentin-bond-strength values so variable?

Properties of Bonding Agents
Bonding systems are often characterized by their bond strength
to the intended substrates, the ability to provide a sealed tooth/
restoration interface, and resistance to hydrolytic degradation.
Hydrophilic monomers are incorporated into the system to
improve bonding to the moist tooth structures.

Measurement of Bond Strength
Evaluation of the efficacy of dentin adhesives is generally based on
the bond strength as determined by loading bonded test specimens
in shear or in tension until fracture occurs. Such tests offer only
indirect evidence of how the adhesive is likely to perform in vivo.
Data published on bond strength for a given material often vary
widely, with high standard deviations. This wide variance is better
described by the coefficient of variation (standard deviation/mean)
and is attributed to the inherent variations at the dentin surface,
such as water content, the presence or absence of a smear layer,
dentin permeability, orientation of the tubules relative to the surface, and differences in the in vitro test design and stress distribution adjacent to the interface. Although there is no agreement on
the minimum strength necessary to provide successful bonding,
20 MPa or higher has been proposed as a reasonable goal.
Current dentin-bonding agents can have bond strengths high
enough to shift the site of clinical failure from the interface to within
the dentin adjacent to the restoration or, in some cases, within the
restoration adjacent to the interface. Thus it is clear that the inherent
bond strength is no longer the limitation in the effectiveness of bonded
restorations. The limiting factor now appears to be, at least for large
restorations, induced stresses generated during curing shrinkage within
the resin-based composite itself. Several products with reduced interfacial polymerization stress have recently been introduced (Chapter 5,
Low Shrinkage Composites), and means of further stress reduction are
currently under investigation and should eventually eliminate this as a
significant clinical problem.
Measurement of Microleakage
The degree of microleakage at the restoration–tooth interface can
be monitored by the penetration of tracers and staining agents. As
is true for bond strength testing, there is also a large variation in

CHAPTER 6

leakage data, depending on the measurement technique and the
manipulation during placement. Often, a good correlation does not
exist between bond strength and microleakage. However, the newer
low-stress products appear to be superior in inhibiting interfacial
leakage between the conditioned tooth structure and adhesive resin.

Aging Effects and Degradation of the Hybrid Layer
The change of bond strength over time is a useful indication of
clinical lifetime and can be evaluated by in vitro accelerated aging
tests. Several investigations have found that the bond strength of
three-step adhesive systems show little or no decrease in contrast to
two-step adhesive systems that decrease significantly during a 4- to
5-year span. Research has also shown that peripheral bonding to
etched enamel, which seals the resin bond from exposure to water,
can significantly increase bond durability. Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) observations have shown that collagen fibrils
in the hybrid layer degrade coincidently with decreasing bond
strength, suggesting that hybrid-layer degradation contributes to
aging of dentin-bond integrity. As indicated in the earlier subsection on “other” bonding agent ingredients, this is likely caused by
the activation of MMPs, which denature the hybrid-layer collagen.
Some in vitro studies offer a degree of predictability for certain clinical situations. For example, a durable dentin bond can
be expected if enamel bonding is used to seal all cavity margins.
Another requirement for achieving lasting intraoral bonds is
hydrolytic stability (resistance to chemical degradation by water).
Enamel and dentin are hydrated, hydrophilic, and permeable to
water. Even if an enamel or dentin surface is initially dried before
applying an adhesive, inadvertent contamination and diffusion
can easily result in water becoming strongly bound to both the
hard tissue and the adhesive. Thus for an adhesive monomer to
wet hard tooth tissue as well as form a durable bond in the moist
environment of the mouth, it must be both hydrophilic for water
compatibility and hydrolytically stable to ensure longevity.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Do bonding agents perform the same in bonding to enamel and dentin?

Classifications by Clinical Steps
When discussing dentin-bonding agents, it has become customary to describe the generations (first generation, second generation,
etc.) of bonding agents that have led sequentially from the earliest,
relatively ineffective materials to the current materials, which provide reliable functional bonds. This organization into generations of
bonding agents is a somewhat artificial device to mark key advances
in materials and techniques along a more-or-less continuous developmental pathway. Therefore this chapter uses a more logical and
straightforward classification for contemporary adhesive systems
based, rather, on their strategy of adhesion and the number of clinical steps involved. This classification was developed by van Meerbeek
et al. As shown in Figure 6-7 and Table 6-1, it is based on two general
approaches to etching, priming, and applying the bonding resin to
dentin and enamel surfaces and further subdivided into the number
of steps in the process. Thus the major categories of bonding systems
are known as etch-and-rinse and self-etch systems, with two subcategories, each according to the number of clinical steps involved.

Etch-and-Rinse Adhesives
Three Step (Fourth Generation)

The long-established, highly reliable method in this category consists
of three steps: (1) an acid-etchant application, (2) application of the

Bonding and Bonding Agents

123

primer, and (3) application of the bonding resin. The primer contains
hydrophilic functional monomers dissolved in an organic solvent
such as acetone or ethanol, or water. The third step is the application
of a hydrophobic resin, as mentioned earlier in the chapter.
Two Step (Fifth Generation)

A simplified method in this category combines the primer and
adhesive resin into one application. This etch-and-rinse strategy
is the most effective to achieve efficient and stable bonding to
enamel. Etching, usually with a 30% to 40% phosphoric gel that
is rinsed away, promotes the dissolution of enamel rods, creating porosities that are filled by a bonding resin through capillary
action, and then followed by resin polymerization.
With dentin, bonding is more difficult and less predictable
than with enamel because of the organic characteristics of dentin.
In this case, phosphoric acid treatment exposes a collagen network
that is nearly devoid of hydroxyapatite. Bonding occurs by diffusion and infiltration of the resin within the collagen mesh, forming
a hybrid layer. After in situ polymerization, this hybrid layer provides micromechanical retention to the restoration. As explained
earlier, true chemical-adhesive bonding is unlikely to contribute
to bond strength because the monomers have only a weak affinity
for collagen. Further, in the two-step category, hydrophilic and
ionic monomers are combined, with the result that the bonded
interface does not develop an all-hydrophobic resin layer, thus
leaving the bond susceptible to water penetration and subsequent
degradation, which greatly reduces bond durability.

Self-Etch Adhesives
Two Step (Sixth Generation)

This approach does not involve a separate etching step. In this
case, an acidic monomer, which is not rinsed, is used to condition and prime at the same time. There are two types of self-etch
adhesive: mild and strong. Strong self-etch adhesives have a low
pH (<1) and have a bonding mechanism that resembles that of the
etch-and-rinse adhesives. Mild self-etch adhesives (pH = 2) only
partially dissolve the dentin surface, so a substantial amount of
hydroxyapatite remains available within the hybrid layer. Specific
carboxyl or phosphate groups of functional monomers can then
chemically interact with this residual hydroxyapatite. Because this
layer has some mineral content, the bond to dentin is better than
that of etch-and-rinse adhesives. However, this interfacial zone
can be more prone to hydrolytic degradation because the structure is more hydrophilic and thus subject to water intrusion. The
dentin-bond durability of mild self-etch primer systems seems to
be adequate.
One Step (Seventh Generation)

The simplified method in this category combines a dentin conditioner, primer, and bonding resin into a single step. Most onestep or “all-in-one” systems are delivered by a bottle, vial, or
single-unit dose applicator, which is formulated as a single component. However, Adper Prompt L-Pop (Table 6-1) is a variation
on this theme, in which two liquid components are packaged
in separate “blister” compartments in a single dispenser. Bursting one blister causes the two components to blend and form
a single component, which is then applied immediately using a
brush that forms the handle of the blister pack. This version of
one-step, two-component, self-etching primer–adhesive is illustrated in Figure 6-7.
One-step self-etch adhesives are an attractive approach for clinicians because of the reduced and less complex number of clinical
steps required compared with multistep etch-and-rinse adhesives.

124

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

There is no need for rinsing or drying of the tooth structure
because of the lack of an etch step. Because of this, numerous selfetch adhesive bonding agents have been introduced that expand
this category for use with total-etch procedures (Adper Easy
Bond Self-Etch; Table 6-1). These recently developed products
have shown durability and versatility for use in an array of clinical applications. New phosphonic acid ether acrylates and crosslinking bis(acrylamide)s facilitate the preparation of self-etching
enamel–dentin adhesives with improved storage stability.
Products in the one-step, self-etch category have undergone limited clinical experience but are showing comparable performance
and durability to two-step self-etch and etch-and-rinse products.
These four categories are described in Table 6-1, which also
provides typical application instructions and examples of representative commercial products for each category. Over the last several
years, the availability of one-step products has been increasing,
and they are replacing earlier versions in the three-step and twostep categories.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Can a single luting agent be used for cementation of indirect restorations in
all clinical scenarios?

Luting Agents
For many years, retention of indirect restorations could only be
attained by the use of favorable tooth preparations and by micromechanical interlocking into irregularities present on the surface
of the restoration and the tooth, without adhesive bonding, as
discussed in this chapter. This type of material is known as a luting agent. The most notable materials in this category are zinc
phosphate and zinc oxide–eugenol (ZOE) cements (Chapter 7,
Zinc Oxide-Based Cements). These lack adhesion and chemical bond formation with tooth structure and, thus, exhibit low
bond strength to dentin. The introduction of adhesive bonding
to enamel and dentin completely changed the procedure of affixing indirect restorations. A number of adhesive bonding materials are available for bonding prostheses, including polycarboxylate
cements, glass-ionomer cements, resin-modified glass-ionomer
(RMGI) cements, and resin cements, which are described in more
detail in this section and in Chapter 7, Combination Cements.
Traditionally, the terms luting and cementing refer to the use of
nonadhesive materials for retaining prostheses, whereas bonding
refers to the use of adhesive bonding materials. The distinction
has faded in the literature; the use of adhesive bonding medium is
also called luting. This section will concentrate on their bonding
mechanism and recent developments in adhesive bonding agents.
Resin cements are low-viscosity resin-based composites that can
bond to various substrates, including tooth structure, resin composites, metal alloys, porcelain, and other ceramics. For cementation
of indirect restorations, where most of the tooth structure is dentin, resin cements have shown better mechanical properties compared with others, such as zinc phosphate cement. Resin cements
can follow the application of dentin-bonding agents, or not, when
bonding to tooth structure. The former can be considered either as
an etch-and-rinse adhesive resin cement or as a self-etch adhesive
resin cement, according to its bonding-agent system. The latter is
a self-adhesive resin cement. In vitro studies have reported better
enamel-bonding performance for non–self-adhesive resin cements
compared with self-adhesive cements. Self-adhesive resin cements

do not show significant infiltration into dentin, but apparently
some type of chemical interaction occurs between the calcium
in hydroxyapatite and the cement monomer functional groups.
For cementation of all-ceramic restorations, resin cement is the
material of choice. Preparation of an all-ceramic restoration can
include, but is not limited to, sandblasting, application of hydrofluoric acid for etching, silanization, or application of a ceramic
primer to improve bond strength. Bonding to ceramic substrates
is discussed in Chapter 10, Bonding of Resin to Dental Ceramics.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are glass-ionomer cements also used as restorative material for class V
erosion lesions?

When an acid-soluble calcium alumino-fluorosilicate glass powder is mixed with an aqueous solution of polyacrylic acid or analogous polyacid (also known as ionomers), Ca2+ and Al3+ ions released
from the powder react with the carboxylic acid (−COOH) of polyacids and crosslink polyacid to form a solid. The solid is known as
GIC and can be used to make restorations. The surface of a freshly
mixed GIC should appear wet and rich in carboxylic acids. These
carboxylic groups will interact strongly with surface Ca2+ ions in
enamel or dentin, resulting in chemical adhesion to tooth structure
as the GIC sets. This chemical adhesion may also be beneficial in
terms of resistance to hydrolytic degradation. This behavior qualifies GIC as a self-adhesive cementing medium and restoration.
A short treatment with polyacrylic acid can clean the tooth surface
and remove the smear layer, exposing collagen fibrils to a depth of
about 0.5 to 1 micron, which improves the micromechanical bonding
of the GIC to dentin surfaces. Most of the current GICs have been
modified with polymerizable acrylate monomers and are referred to
as RMGIs. They contain a light-curable acrylic resin that provides for
rapid polymerization at and near the surface, and they bond using the
same bonding mechanisms as nonresin glass ionomers.
Clinical longevity depends not just on bond strength but also
on dislodging forces. Composite restoratives undergo significant polymerization shrinkage (Chapter 5, Cure Shrinkage and
Managing Shrinkage Stress), which creates stresses adjacent to
the resin–dentin interface that can rupture dentinal bonds in all
but the smallest restorations. Because glass ionomers generate low
stresses on setting, they are well retained even in areas such as class
V sites, where occlusal forces induce relatively little stress. They
also have been used with somewhat limited success as pit and fissure sealants. However, because of the high stresses induced by
intraoral forces in occlusal areas, a greater degree of dislodgment
and fracture of the GIC sealants occurs in these sites. GICs are
described in some detail in Chapter 7, Glass-Ionomer Cement.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are self-adhesive cements currently not used to bond orthodontic
brackets?

Applications in Orthodontic, Endodontic,
and Preventive Dentistry
The procedures of acid-etching and adhesive bonding that provide
a strong, durable bond between resin and tooth structure have
also been the basis for dental procedures as diverse as orthodontic
bracket bonding, endodontic sealers, amalgam bonding, and pit

CHAPTER 6

and fissure sealants. Additional applications in the bonding of prostheses, porcelain laminate veneer bonding, and adhesive cements,
including glass-ionomer restorative materials, will also be discussed
in greater detail throughout the book but with particular emphasis
in the chapters on composites, cements, amalgams, and ceramics.

Bonding Resins for Orthodontic Brackets
Orthodontic treatment with fixed appliances involves brackets and
bands. Bands are flat metal bands that encircle teeth and are usually
used on molars. Brackets are welded to bands or bonded to enamel
and hold the wires that apply forces for tooth alignment. The
development of bonding has contributed to a decrease in banding,
even in posterior teeth. Various luting agents have been used in
orthodontics, such as polycarboxylate cement, GIC, and RMGI
cements. Contemporary bonding to enamel involves the following:
1. Prophylaxis of bonding surface
2. Etching with phosphoric acid gel or aqueous solutions
3. Rinsing with water
4. Drying with air
5. Application of sealant or primer
6. Bonding of brackets with resin cement
7. Light-curing the dual-cured or light-cured cement
Manufacturers do not recommend self-adhesive cements as luting agents for orthodontic fixed appliances. Self-adhesive cements
have lower bond strengths to intact enamel in comparison with
conventional orthodontic resin cements that require etching
with phosphoric acid. However, self-etching systems have shown
acceptable results for the bonding of orthodontic brackets.
In orthodontic treatment, bonding involves mainly enamel.
Increasingly, adults are undergoing tooth alignment. This population has more amalgam restorations, porcelain-fused-to-metal
(PFM) crowns, and all-ceramic crowns. Therefore bonding of
brackets to those surfaces also plays an important role in orthodontic treatment. It is important that the bonding of brackets
be reliable because replacing loose brackets is time-consuming
and costly.
Several types of surface treatments can be used with restorative
materials to increase bond strength. For example, roughening with
a diamond bur and sandblasting enhance bonding, especially in
the case of metals. These treatments create surface irregularities and
increased surface area. This promotes micromechanical retention
and chemical adhesion in the case of resins, such as those containing
4-META, 10-MDP, and others, as shown in Figure 6-4. The bond
strength of brackets bonded to amalgam (see following discussion) is
lower than that to etched enamel. In addition to forming a reliable
bond, the ability of a resin to reduce or prevent demineralization
(“white spot” caries) in the difficult-to-clean areas around orthodontic brackets and bands and to reduce damage to enamel during treatment are also important properties in this clinical scenario.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the materials and techniques needed to overcome the root canal
system environment and create a hermetic seal with endodontic obturation
systems?

Endodontic Sealers
Endodontic sealers are used in conjunction with a solid or semisolid
core material to fill voids and seal root canals during obturation.
These sealers, sometimes called cements, should fill and promote

Bonding and Bonding Agents

125

a close seal between the core and the dentinal walls of the canal,
preventing or minimizing leakage, entombing residual microorganisms, and preferably filling inaccessible areas of the root canal
system. Sealer selection may influence the outcome of endodontic
treatment. Historically, gutta-percha (a natural, malleable rubber
related to latex) has been and continues to be used as the solid core
material in combination with ZOE or calcium hydroxide cement,
or an epoxy-based sealer. GIC and resin-modified GIC are also
used as root canal sealers. These can chemically bond to root canal
dentin but not to gutta-percha. There has been a surge of development in endodontic obturation materials to produce, via adhesive
mechanisms, a sequence of bonded interfaces from dentin to sealer
to the core obturation material and from the coronal to apical
aspects of the canal space, including anastomoses, canal fins, culde-sacs, and isthmuses. These new developments will be discussed
in Chapter 7, Endodontic Sealers.
The configuration of the root canal presents an unfavorable “C-factor” for these resin-based materials. C-factors can be
extremely high, over 1000, for the canal configuration. Thus a
resin endodontic sealer is subjected to severe polymerization
shrinkage stresses during setting, which may cause debonding
and gap formation along the periphery of the root canal obturation and adhesive interfaces. Gaps can form between the sealer
and dentin wall or in between the solid core material (e.g., guttapercha) and the sealer. Therefore root canal obturation inherently
requires a number of different materials and involves multiple
interfaces, thereby creating a greater challenge than most other
applications of adhesive dentistry.
In a long, narrow space such as the root canal, the application of self-etching adhesives or any other bonding system
becomes challenging and might not be uniform throughout the
entire interface. Therefore, if resin infiltration into demineralized dentin and hybrid formation is not adequate to prevent
movement of fluids inward through dentin, over time, the
bond will be compromised, and the seal will fail. In addition,
in bonding systems that contain volatile solvents, evaporation
might be hindered. The canal anatomy is not only problematic
to adhesive root canal obturation but also for the bonding of
prefabricated posts.
A further problem is that some irrigating solutions (e.g.,
sodium hypochlorite, NaOCl) and intracanal medicaments can
also have adverse effects on root canal dentin collagen and, consequently, on the longevity of endodontic bonding. In vitro studies
have reported that NaOCl has deleterious effects on dentin collagen and is both concentration and time dependent. Destruction of the collagen matrix in mineralized tissues results in a less
tough, more brittle substrate that might precipitate fatigue crack
propagation during cyclic stresses. This might increase the susceptibility of the root-treated teeth to posttreatment crown or
root fracture.
The results of a 2001 in vitro study indicate that root
canals treated with 5% NaOCl have significantly lower bond
strengths of C&B Metabond cement (Parkell, Inc., Edgewood, NY) to dentin. However, it is important to note that
the effects of endodontic irrigation on the bonding of resin
cement to radicular dentin are dependent on the dentinbonding system used.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does amalgam bonding to dentin differ from composite bonding to
dentin?

126

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Sealed fissure

• Figure 6-8 Schematic of a tooth cross section, illustrating penetration
of a sealant into an occlusal fissure.

Amalgam Bonding
Mechanical retention and resistance forms continue to be used
for amalgam restorations (Chapter 8, Clinical Performance of
Amalgam Restorations). However, adhesive bonding methods for
retaining and sealing amalgam restorations with dentin bonding
to reduce microleakage and increase fracture resistance have also
been investigated. Bonding agents employing M–R–X-type adhesive monomers such as 4-META (Parkell Inc., Edgewood, NY;
Figure 6-4) have achieved some degree of success, but the mechanism for bonding amalgam to resin is predominantly mechanical. It is established during condensation of the amalgam into the
viscous chemical-curing resin adhesive layer, producing macromechanical interlocking after polymerization. Thicker adhesive layers or interfaces have been shown to promote greater retention
under certain conditions. For example, Amalgambond Plus with
4-META contains polymethylmethacrylate and forms a thick,
viscous layer. Studies have shown that amalgam adhesive bond
strength ranges from 6 to 15 MPa.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Can sealants prevent secondary caries progression when placed over
underlying carious enamel or dentin?

Pit and Fissure Sealants
Various materials and techniques have been advocated for preventing caries in the susceptible pit and fissure areas of posterior
teeth. The most widely used sealant techniques make use of resin
systems that can penetrate into the pits and fissures and seal
them against oral bacteria and acid demineralization. A cross
section of a tooth with a pit and fissure sealant is shown schematically in Figure 6-8.
Several types of resins, both filled and unfilled, have been
employed as pit and fissure sealants. The commercially available
products have been based on either the UDMA or bis-GMA
monomers (Figure 6-4) that may be polymerized by either the

Selected Readings
Bedran-Russo A, Leme-Kraus AA, Vidal CMP, et al: An overview of dental adhesive systems and the dynamic tooth–adhesive interface, Dent
Clin N Am 61:713–731, 2017.

amine-benzoyl peroxide chemical activation–initiation system or
by light activation, as discussed in Chapter 5, Classification by
Curing Method. The unfilled resins are available as colorless or
tinted transparent materials. The filled resins are translucent and
available either as tooth-colored or white materials.
The success of the sealant technique is highly dependent on
obtaining and maintaining an intimate adaptation of the sealant
to the tooth surface. Therefore the sealants must be of relatively
low viscosity so that they will wet the tooth, flow, and penetrate
the pits and fissures. To enhance wetting and mechanical retention of the sealant, the tooth surface is first conditioned by acidetching, rinsed, and dried thoroughly, as described previously. The
physical properties of the sealants are closer to those of unfilled
direct resins than to those of resin-based composites.
The reduction in occlusal caries resulting from the careful use
of pit and fissure sealants has been impressive. Consequently, the
American Dental Association, the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, the American Society of Dentistry for Children,
and the American Association of Public Health Dentistry have all
endorsed the use of sealants as an effective therapy. Clinical studies have shown that the failure frequency of sealants is approximately 5% per year after a single application. In an early report,
after 10 years, 78% of first permanent molars were free of caries
after a single application of sealant, compared with only 31% of
caries-free teeth in the unsealed matched pairs. Mertz-Fairhurst
et al. found even more dramatic results in a study of sealed class
I composite restorations where carious dentin was not removed.
They showed that the lesions did not progress over a period of
10 years, as long as the sealants remained intact. Clinical trials in
which sealants were intentionally placed in pits and fissures having caries have shown that as long as a sealant is well retained, no
caries progression occurs.
If doubt exists about whether the pit or fissure is free from caries
or not, it is still justified to place a sealant. If a dentist feels uncomfortable about sealing a potentially carious lesion and believes that
a visual inspection of the potential lesion is required, another conservative approach can be taken that consists of minimal cavity
preparation and the placement of an enamel–dentin bonded composite restoration combined with a sealant application. With such
an approach, most of the occlusal surface is sealed. This restoration
is called a preventive-resin restoration (PRR). The PRR treatment has
exhibited a success rate of 75% after 9 years, a remarkably high success rate compared with traditional amalgam treatment.

Acknowledgment
The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. Barry K. Norling, now deceased, for his contributions to the earlier editions of this chapter
and Dr. Danna Mota Moreira, Faculty of Dentistry, Unichristus,
Fortaleza, Brazil, for reviewing and adding important sections to
this chapter.

Betancourt DE, Baldion PA, Castellanos JE. Resin-dentin bonding interface: Mechanisms of degradation and strategies for stabilization of the
hybrid layer, Int J Biomater 2019: 1–11, 2019.
Buonocore MG: The Use of Adhesives in Dentistry, Springfield, IL, 1975,
Charles C Thomas.

CHAPTER 6

In this book, Buonocore, the developer of the acid-etch technique,
identified potential problems associated with the use of adhesives in
dentistry that are still germane to current systems, for example, dentin
bonding agents.
De Munck J, van Landuyt KL, Peumans M, et al: A critical review of the
durability of adhesion to tooth tissue: Methods and results, J Dent Res
84:118–132, 2005.
This review examines the fundamental processes that cause the adhesion of biomaterials to enamel and dentin to degrade over time. This
paper critically appraises methodologies that focus on chemical degradation patterns of hydrolysis and elution of interface components,
as well as mechanically oriented test setups, such as those designed for
fatigue and fracture toughness measurements.
Moreira DM, Almeida JFA, Ferraz CCR, et al: Structural analysis of
bovine root dentin after use of different endodontics auxiliary chemical substances, J Endod 35:1023–1027, 2009.
Moretto SG, Russo EMA, Carvalho RCR, et al: MV. 3-year clinical effectiveness of one-step adhesives in non-carious cervical lesions, J Dent
41:675–682, 2013.

Bonding and Bonding Agents

127

Pashley DH, Tay FR, Carvalho RM, et al: From dry bonding to waterwet bonding to ethanol-wet bonding, Am J Dent 20:7–20, 2007.
A review of the interactions between dentin matrix and solvated resins
using a macromodel of the hybrid layer.
Peutzfeldt A, Sahafi A, Flury S: Bonding of restorative materials to dentin
with various luting agents, Oper Dent 36:266–273, 2011.
Simonsen RJ, Neal RJ: A review of the clinical application and performance of pit and fissure sealants, Aust Dent J 56(Suppl 1):45–58, 2011.
This paper focuses on the clinical aspects of pit and fissure sealant
application and the most recent publications that support an evidence-based clinical application technique.
van Meerbeek B, Yoshihara K, Yoshida Y, et al: State of the art of self-etch
adhesives, Dent Mater 27:17–28, 2011.
An overview of the types of adhesive systems and application strategies
in use as of 2011.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Useful Websites
Adept Institute: http://adeptinstitute.com/members/000_source/membership
/list.php?view=3&title=Bonding+%28Direct+Resin%29.
Air Force Dental: https://www.airforcemedicine.af.mil/DECS/.
The Biomaterials Network: http://biomat.net/site2/tag/biomaterials/.
Clinical guidelines for photocuring restorative resins: http://www.faqs
.org/abstracts/Health/Clinical-guidelines-for-photocuring-restorative
-resins-Assessing-the-effect-of-extraneous-light-on-p.html.
Dental Compare: http://www.dentalcompare.com/.
Literature Citations
Asmussen E, Munksgaard EC: Bonding of restorative resins to dentine:
Status of dentine adhesives and impact on cavity design and filling
techniques, Int Dent J 38:97–104, 1988.
The chemistry of dentin bonding agents is described, and bond
strength data are presented. Also, factors involved in clinical usage
that influence retention are cited.
Bedran-Russo A, Leme-Kraus AA, Vidal CMP, et al: An overview of
dental adhesive systems and the dynamic tooth–adhesive interface, Dent Clin N Am 61:713–731, 2017.
Betancourt DE, Baldion PA, Castellanos JE: Resin-dentin bonding interface: Mechanisms of degradation and strategies for stabilization of the hybrid layer, Int J Biomater 2019:1–11, 2019.
doi:10.1155/2019/5268342.
Bowen RL, Eichmiller FC, Marjenhoff WA, et al: Adhesive bonding of
composites, J Am Coll Dent 56:10–13, 1989.
This article discusses the merits of several of the popular dentin and
enamel bonding systems, noting differences in chemical components
and instructions for use.
Buonocore MG: A simple method of increasing the adhesion of acrylic
filling materials to enamel surfaces, J Dent Res 34:849–853, 1955.
In this paper, published approximately 50 y ago, Buonocore
suggested that etching enamel would improve mechanical bonding of an unfilled resin (composites were nonexistent at that time).
The technique is now an essential step in the use of all modern
composites.
Buonocore MG: The Use of Adhesives in Dentistry, Springfield, IL
1975, Charles C Thomas.
In this book, Buonocore, the developer of the acid-etch technique,
identified potential problems associated with the use of adhesives in
dentistry that are still germane to current systems, for example, dentin
bonding agents.
Cardoso MV, de Almeida Neves A, Mine A, et al: Current aspects on
bonding effectiveness and stability in adhesive dentistry, Aust Dent J
56(Suppl 1):31–44, 2011.
De Munck J, van Landuyt KL, Peumans M, et al: A critical review of
the durability of adhesion to tooth tissue: Methods and results,
J Dent Res 84:118–132, 2005.
This review examines the fundamental processes that cause the adhesion of biomaterials to enamel and dentin to degrade over time. This
paper critically appraises methodologies that focus on chemical degradation patterns of hydrolysis and elution of interface components,
as well as mechanically oriented test setups, such as those designed for
fatigue and fracture toughness measurements.
Douglas WH: Clinical status of dentine bonding agents, J Dent 17:209–
215, 1989.
An excellent review of the evolution of earlier dentin bonding
agents, the problems associated with adhesion, and the clinical
criteria involved in phenomena, such as microleakage and tooth
strengthening.
Fusayama T, Nakamura M, Kurosaki M, et al: Nonpressure adhesion of a
new adhesive restorative resin, J Dent Res 58:1364–1370, 1979.
A breakthrough in dentin bonding was demonstrated when acid etching of dentin was reported to increase retention of restorations but
with no increase in pulpal trauma.

Giannini M, Makishi P, Ayres APA, et al: Self-etch adhesive systems:
A literature review, Braz Dent J 26:3–10, 2015. doi:10.1590/01036440201302442 .
Glantz P: On wettability and adhesiveness, Odont Rev 20(Suppl 17):5–
124, 1969.
The first in a series of publications by this author suggesting that the
use of topical fluorides provides an additional mechanism involved in
reduction of dental caries, that is, lowering of the surface energy of tooth
structure, thereby reducing plaque accumulation over a given interval.
Li G-H, Niu L-N, Zhang W, et al: Ability of new obturation materials
to improve the seal of the root canal system – A review, Acta Biomater
10:1050–1063, 2014. doi:10.1016/j.actbio.2013.11.015.
Hayashi M, Takahashi Y, Hirai M, et al: Effect of endodontic irrigation on bonding of resin cement to radicular dentin, Eur J Oral Sci
113:70–76, 2005.
Houpt M, Fuks A, Eidelman E: The preventive resin (composite resin/
sealant) restoration: Nine-year results, Quintessence Int 25:155–159,
1994.
Nine-year data presented to show the efficiency of using preventive
resin restorations (PRRs) to treat pits and fissures with carious lesions.
Ikemura K, Endo T: A review of our development of dental adhesives—
Effects of radical polymerization initiators and adhesive monomers on
adhesion, Dent Mater J 29:109–121, 2010.
The authors present a thorough review of their development of monomers for self-etching and self-adhesive bonding systems, the role of
initiators, and chemical structure–property relationships.
Imazato S: Antibacterial properties of resin composites and dentin bonding systems, Dent Mater 19:449–457, 2003.
This paper reviews the research conducted on the evaluation of antibacterial properties of commercial composites and adhesive systems,
in addition to the discussion of many attempts to achieve antibacterial
composites or adhesives.
Liu Y, Tjäderhane L, Breschi L, et al: Limitations in bonding to dentin
and experimental strategies to prevent bond degradation, J Dent Res
90:953–968, 2011.
Marshall SJ, Bayne SC, Baier R, et al: A review of adhesion science, Dent
Mater 26:11–16, 2010.
Mertz-Fairhurst EJ. Current status of sealant retention and caries prevention, J Dent Edu 48:18–26, 1984.
Ten-year data presented to show a substantial reduction in caries following the placement of sealant compared with untreated control
surfaces.
Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Curtis JW, Ergle JW, et al: Ultraconservative and
cariostatic sealed restorations: Results at year 10, J Am Dent Assoc
129:55–66, 1998.
A classic 10-y study that demonstrates the efficacy of sealed composites in preventing caries progression even when the carious dentin was
not removed.
Moreira DM, Almeida JFA, Ferraz CCR, et al: Structural analysis of
bovine root dentin after use of different endodontics auxiliary
chemical substances, J Endod 35:1023–1027, 2009.
Moretto SG, Russo EMA, Carvalho RCR, et al: MV. 3-year clinical
effectiveness of one-step adhesives in non-carious cervical lesions,
J Dent 41:675–682, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.jdent.2013.05.016.
Nakabayashi N, Kojima K, Masuhara E: Sealants consensus development
conference statement on dental sealants and the prevention of tooth
decay, J Am Dent Assoc 108:233–236, 1984.
Recommendations are made from a consensus conference on the state
of the art of sealant therapy. The data presented were strongly supportive of sealant use.
Neeraj M, Kundabala M, Shashirashmi A: Strategies to overcome polymerization shrinkage − Materials and techniques. A review, Dental Update
37:115–125, 2010. doi:10.12968/denu.2010.37.2.115.
Overton JD, Vance RI: Effect of adhesive volume on the bond strength of
bonded complex amalgam restorations, Am J Dent 18:320–322, 2005.
Pashley DH, Carvalho RM, Sano H, et al: The microtensile bond test: A
review, J Adhes Dent 1:299–309, 1999.

127.e1

A review of the microtensile bond test, which permits true interfacial
bond strength measurement in bonded systems where shear bond tests
yield cohesive dentin failure.
Pashley DH, Tay FR, Carvalho RM, et al: From dry bonding to waterwet bonding to ethanol-wet bonding, Am J Dent 20:7–20, 2007.
A review of the interactions between dentin matrix and solvated resins
using a macromodel of the hybrid layer.
Pedro PC, Souza AMF, Aranha JH, et al: In vitro cytotoxicity and in
vivo biocompatibility of contemporary resin-modified glass-ionomer
cements, Dent Mater 22:838–844, 2006.
Perdigão J: Dentin bonding—variables related to the clinical situation
and the substrate treatment, Dent Mater 26:24–37, 2010.
Peutzfeldt A, Sahafi A, Flury S: Bonding of restorative materials to
dentin with various luting agents, Oper Dent 36:266–273, 2011.
Phillips RW, Ryge G (editors): Proceedings on Adhesive Restorative Dental
Materials, Spencer, IN, 1961, Owen Litho Service.
These historical transactions resulted from the first workshop on the
problems of, and potential solutions to, the development of adhesive dental materials. The recommendations for critically important
areas of research provided impetus for subsequent investigations in
this area.
Powers JM, O’Keefe KL: Update on seventh-generation bonding agents,
Inside Dentistry 5:52–56, 2009.
Schwartz RS, Fransman R: Adhesive dentistry and endodontics: Materials, clinical strategies and procedures for restoration of access cavities:
A review, J Endod 31:151–165, 2005.
Simonsen RJ, Neal RJ: A review of the clinical application and performance of pit and fissure sealants, Aust Dent J 56(Suppl 1):45–58, 2011.
This paper focuses on the clinical aspects of pit and fissure sealant
application and the most recent publications that support an evidence-based clinical application technique.

127.e2

van Landuyt KL, Peumans M, De Munck J, et al: Three-year clinical performance of a HEMA-free one-step self-etch adhesive in non-carious
cervical lesions, Eur J Oral Sci 119:511–516, 2011.
van Landuyt KL, Snauwaert J, De Munck J, et al: Systematic review of
the chemical composition of contemporary dental adhesives, Biomaterials 28:3757–3785, 2007.
This article systematically reviews the ingredients commonly used in
current dental adhesives as well as the properties of these ingredients.
It also includes an extensive table with the chemical formulation of
contemporary dental adhesives.
van Meerbeek B, Peumans M, Poitevin A, et al: Relationship between
bond-strength tests and clinical outcomes, Dent Mater 26(2):100–121,
2010.
van Meerbeek B, Yoshihara K, Yoshida Y, et al: State of the art of selfetch adhesives, Dent Mater 27:17–28, 2011.
An overview of the types of adhesive systems and application strategies
in use as of 2011.
Vaught RL: Mechanical versus chemical retention for restoring complex
restorations: What is the evidence? J Dent Educ 71:1356–1362, 2007.
Zhang K, Kim YK, Cadenaro M, et al: Effects of different exposure times
and concentrations of sodium hypochlorite/ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid on the structural integrity of mineralized dentin, J Endod
36:105–109, 2010.
Zisman WA: Influence of constitution on adhesion, Ind Eng Chem
55:18–38, 1963.
A pioneer in surface phenomena discusses parameters that influence
wetting and the use of contact angles to screen the potential wetting of
adhesives to selected adherends.

