
CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the advantages and disadvantages of natural diamond abrasives
compared with synthetic diamond abrasives?

Diamond. Diamond is a transparent, colorless mineral composed
of carbon atoms in a specific crystalline structure. This is the
hardest known substance. Diamond abrasives are supplied in
several forms, including bonded abrasive rotary instruments,
flexible metal-backed abrasive strips, and diamond polishing
pastes.
The advantages of synthetic diamonds over natural diamonds include their consistent size and shape and their
lower cost. Synthetic diamond is used in the manufacture
of diamond saws, wheels, and burs. Blocks with embedded
diamond particles are used to true other types of bonded
abrasives. Diamond polishing pastes are also produced from
particles smaller than 5 μm in diameter. Synthetic diamond
abrasives are used primarily on tooth structure, ceramic materials, and resin-based composite materials.
Emery. This abrasive is a grayish-black corundum prepared in a
fine-grain form. Emery is used predominantly in coated abrasive discs and is available in a variety of grit sizes. Emery may
also be used for finishing metal alloys or acrylic resin materials.
Garnet. The garnet minerals are the silicates of aluminum, cobalt,
iron, magnesium, and manganese. Garnet is extremely hard
and, when fractured during the grinding operation, garnet
forms sharp, chisel-shaped plates, making this material a
highly effective abrasive. Garnet is available on coated discs
and arbor bands and is used in grinding metal alloys and
acrylic resin materials.
Kieselguhr. This material is composed of the siliceous remains of
minute aquatic plants known as diatoms. The coarser form of
kieselguhr is called diatomaceous earth and is used as a filler in
many dental materials, such as the hydrocolloid impression
materials. Kieselguhr is a mild abrasive.
Pumice. Volcanic activity produces this light-gray highly siliceous
material. Pumice is used mainly in grit form but can be found
in some rubber-bonded abrasives. Both pumice forms are
used on denture bases and in polishing tooth enamel, dental
amalgam, and acrylic resins.
Quartz. This is the most commonly used form of silica and is a
very hard, colorless, and transparent mineral. It is pulverized
to form sharp, angular particles to make coated abrasive discs
that are used primarily for finishing metal alloys and grinding
dental enamel.
Rouge. Iron oxide is the fine red abrasive component of rouge. Like
tripoli, rouge is blended with various soft binders into a cake
form. Rouge is used to polish high-noble-metal alloys such as
yellow gold alloys.
Sand. Sand is a mixture of small mineral particles predominantly
composed of silica. The mixtures are applied under air pressure, through a process called sandblasting, to remove refractory investment materials from base-metal alloy castings.
They are also coated onto paper discs for grinding metal
alloys and acrylic resin materials.

341

Silicon Carbide. The particles are sharp, and they break to form
new sharp particles exhibiting highly efficient cutting of
materials, such as alloys, ceramics, and acrylic resin materials. Silicon carbide is available as an abrasive in coated discs
and as vitreous- and rubber-bonded instruments in green and
blue-black form. The green form is often preferred because
substrates are more visible against the green color.
Tin Oxide. This extremely fine abrasive material is used extensively
as a polishing agent for polishing teeth and metallic restorations in the mouth. It is mixed with water, alcohol, or glycerin to form a mildly abrasive paste.
Tripoli. This abrasive is derived from a lightweight, friable siliceous sedimentary rock. The rock is ground into very fine
particles and formed with soft binders into bars of polishing
compound for polishing metal alloys and some acrylic resin
materials.
Zirconium Oxide. This abrasive is tougher than aluminum oxide
and usually used as a mixture with aluminum oxide primarily
in elastic or rubberlike finishing and polishing rotary-shaped
instruments.
Zirconium Silicate. Zircon or zirconium silicate (ZrSiO4) is a mineral that is ground to various particle sizes and used to make
coated abrasive discs and strips. ZrSiO4 is frequently used as
a component of dental prophylaxis pastes.

Design of Abrasive Instruments
To achieve the goal of holding abrasives against a workpiece with
pressure, abrasives are often mixed with another material to fabricate an instrument for practical applications. Abrasive instruments
are generally classified as bonded, coated, and nonbonded. Bonded
instruments use a binder to hold abrasive particles together and
are molded to form tools of desired sizes and shapes (Figure 16-7).
Coated instruments are fabricated by securing abrasive particles to
a flexible backing material with an adhesive. These instruments are
usually supplied as discs and finishing strips (Figure 16-8). Nonbonded abrasives are loose abrasive particles mixed with water,
glycerin, or some other medium to produce a paste or slurry or are
propelled by the force of air or water pressure against a workpiece
(such as sandblasting for buildings). Each class of instrument is
discussed in the following subsections.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can one differentiate between high-quality and low-quality bonded
abrasive tools?

Bonded Abrasives
Bonded abrasives are made by incorporating abrasive particles
with a binder to form grinding tools such as points, wheels, separating discs, coated thin discs, and a wide variety of other abrasive
instruments. The binder can be organic substances (resinoid, rubber, and so forth), ceramics (glass or glass-ceramic), and metals.
Bonding of abrasive particles to the binders can be achieved by
sintering, vitrification, and polymerization of binders. Additional
methods are also used.
Bonded abrasives that tend to disintegrate rapidly against
a substrate are too weak and result in increased abrasive costs
because of the reduced instrument life. Those that tend to degrade
too slowly get clogged with grinding debris. The result is a loss of

342

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

• Figure 16-7 Typical bonded abrasive instruments used in the dental
laboratory include vitreous bonded abrasive wheels and points (three instruments on left) and rubber-bonded abrasive bullets (three instruments
on right).

• Figure 16-9 Spiral wheel polishers are designed for maximal flexibility
of use on most areas of a restoration. These polishers have a polyamide
rubber construction and are available in different diameters with several
types and grits of embedded abrasive. Laboratory and clinic polishers are
available for use on denture acrylics, composites, ceramics, and precious
metals. (Courtesy Dr. Farzan Pouranfar.)

• Figure 16-8 Coated abrasive discs and strips. Discs are available in
several sizes and with both paper and moisture-resistant backings. Paperbacked discs are represented by the top row of discs; moisture-resistant
Mylar-backed discs are shown in the second row. Mylar-backed abrasive
strips may be coated with two different grades of abrasive. The coatings
are separated in the center of the strip by an uncoated area, which allows
the strip to be passed between teeth.

abrasive efficiency, increased heat generation, and increased finishing time. An ideal binder holds the abrasive particles in the
tool long enough to cut, grind, or polish the substrate, and yet
the binder releases the particles either before cutting efficiency
is lost or before heat buildup causes thermal damage to the substrate. Binders are specially formulated for substrate-specific
applications.
Sintering is a process of closely packing particles below the
melting point of the main components to densify and strengthen
a structure by bonding, diffusion, and flow between particles. For
example, the head of a bladed tungsten carbide bur is made from a
mixture of 5% to 7% of cobalt powder with a balance of tungsten
carbide powders and less than 1% of other additives placed under
pressure in vacuum and heated to approximately 1350 °C. The
sintered head is then welded to a steel shank.
Vitreous-bond materials are composed of finely ground glassforming materials or ceramic matrix material with which the abrasive is thoroughly mixed. The mixture of binders and abrasive is
cold-pressed to the instrument shape and fired to fuse the binder.
The vitrified instruments are strong and rigid. They retain high
strength at elevated temperatures and are practically unaffected by
water, oils, and acids.

Resinoid-bonded abrasive is a mixture of phenolic resin in powdered or liquid form mixed with the abrasive grains cold-pressed
or hot-pressed to a form, then heated to cure. Hot-pressing yields
an abrasive binder with extremely low porosity. The reactions
are thermosetting processes. Rubber-bonded abrasives are made
in a similar manner. Because most of the rubber wheels, cups,
and points contain latex, a known allergen, all residues must be
removed from polished surfaces. Spiral finishing and abrasive
wheels (Figure 16-9) are made of synthetic thermoplastic polymers impregnated with aluminum oxide particles.
Metal bonds are used to better retain diamond abrasives to the
instrument because diamond is the hardest material known, and
diamond grits are expensive and must be used in limited quantities. Metal bonds provide high grit retention and low wear during grinding. Metal bonds are either multilayered by sintering a
mixture of metal powder and abrasive particles or single layered by
electroplating or brazing. The multilayered method is similar to the
sintering process discussed earlier. For the single-layered method,
diamond abrasives are bonded to metal wheels and bur blanks with
special heat-resistant resins such as polyimides. The supercoarse to
fine grades are then electroplated with a refractory metal film such
as nickel. Figure 16-10 shows a set of specialized diamond burs for
occlusal reduction of tooth surfaces. The nickel plating provides
improved particle retention and acts as a heat sink during grinding.
Titanium nitride coatings, seen as a gold color on some diamond
abrasive instruments, further extends their longevity.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the purposes of truing a grinding instrument?

A bonded abrasive instrument should always be trued and
dressed before use. Truing is a procedure by which the abrasive
instrument is run against a harder abrasive block until the abrasive
instrument rotates in the handpiece without eccentricity or runout when placed on the substrate (Figure 16-11, A). The dressing

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

procedure, like truing, is used to shape the instrument, but dressing accomplishes two different purposes as well. First, the dressing procedure reduces the instrument to the correct working size
and shape. Second, dressing is used to remove clogged debris from
the abrasive instrument to restore grinding efficiency during the
finishing operation. The clogging of the abrasive instrument with
debris is called abrasive blinding. Abrasive blinding occurs when
the debris generated from grinding or polishing occludes the small
spaces between the abrasive particles on the tool and reduces the
depth to which particles can penetrate into the substrate. As a
result, abrasive efficiency is lost, and greater heat is generated. A
blinded abrasive appears to have a coating of the substrate material

343

on its surface. Frequent dressing of the abrasive instrument during the finishing operation on a truing instrument, as illustrated
in Figure 16-11 (B–E), maintains the efficiency of the abrasive in
removing the substrate material.
Diamond instruments are preshaped and trued; they are not
treated like other bonded abrasives. Diamond cleaning stones are
used on the supercoarse to fine grades to remove debris buildup
and to maintain grinding efficiency. An example of a diamond
cleaning stone is shown in Figure 16-12. Cleaning stones should
not be used on finishing diamonds because their bonded particles
are quickly removed. Manufacturers provide special operating and
cleaning instructions for these instruments.

Coated Abrasive Discs and Strips
Coated abrasives are fabricated by securing abrasive particles to
a flexible backing material (heavyweight paper, metal, or Mylar)
with a suitable adhesive material. These abrasives typically are
supplied as discs and finishing strips. Discs are available in various diameters and with thin and very thin backing thicknesses.
Both metal- and plastic-backed finishing strips are available to
smooth and polish the proximal surfaces of all direct and indirect bonded restorations. Metal-backed strips are usually limited
to situations in which very tight proximal contacts are involved.
Care must be taken to avoid lacerating the gingival tissues. Metalbacked strips are more costly, but they can be autoclaved and
used several times if they are not damaged and infection control
practice guidelines permit. Plastic-backed strips are used primarily for resin composites, compomers, hybrid ionomers, and resin
cements. A further designation is made in regard to whether or
not the disc or strip is moisture resistant. The use of abrasive discs
or strips with moisture-resistant backings is advantageous because
their stiffness is not reduced by water degradation. Furthermore,
moisture acts as a lubricant to improve cutting efficiency. Examples of coated abrasives are shown in Figure 16-8.
• Figure 16-10 Specialized diamond burs for occlusal reduction of tooth
surfaces. Color-coded bands refer to the depth of occlusal reduction that
will be created when grinding to the depth of the wide stop above the
diamond-coated portion of the bur. (Courtesy Meisinger USA.)

Nonbonded Abrasives
Nonbonded abrasives are primarily used for final finishing and
polishing of enamel or restoration surfaces. For example, dental
prophylaxis pastes typically contain zirconium silicate. They must

• Figure 16-11 A dressing tool is used to true, shape, and clean bonded abrasive instruments both before
and during the finishing procedure. A, A rubber-bonded abrasive cylinder (left) shows irregular external
contours, which will cause it to run eccentrically. The cylinder is first trued against a diamond-coated
abrasive dressing tool (center) to make it rotate around the central axis of the instrument. Once trued, the
abrasive is further dressed to a desired working shape (right). B, Instruments that are blinded with debris
lose their cutting efficiency and generate more heat during operation. Note the coating of debris on the
abrasive surface. C, A scanning electron micrograph of the same instrument reveals the significant amount
of debris that is clogging the instrument surface. D, Frequent dressing of the abrasive on the dressing tool
shown in (A) removes accumulated debris. E, A scanning electron micrograph of the blinded abrasive
shown in (C) after dressing reveals that the debris has been removed and the abrasive surface restored.

344

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

A

B

C

• Figure 16-12 Removing debris from diamond instruments with a diamond cleaning stone. A, Diamond
bur in high-speed rotary handpiece before cleaning. Note the accumulated debris. B, The bur is cleaned
by running it against the moistened diamond cleaning stone for 2 to 4 seconds. C, The cleaned diamond
bur has no debris remaining among the diamond abrasive particles.

be applied to the substrate with a nonabrasive carrier such as synthetic foam, rubber, felt, or chamois cloth. The abrasive particles
are dispersed in a water-soluble medium such as glycerin.
Abrasive pastes used on restorative materials contain either
aluminum oxide (alumina) or diamond particles. Alumina pastes
should be used with a rotary instrument and increasing amounts
of water as the polishing process proceeds from coarser to finer
abrasive particles. Diamond abrasive pastes are used in a relatively dry condition. The instruments that apply the paste to the
material surface are equally important. These include ribbed prophy cups (the ribbed type or the more flexible nonribbed type),
brushes, and felt wheels.
Abrasive pastes have several disadvantages: (1) they are relatively thick and cannot gain access to embrasures, (2) the pastes
tend to splatter when they spin off the instruments at excessive
rotational speeds or if they become wet, and (3) heat is generated
when insufficient coolant is used or when continuous polishing
pressure is applied without allowing the coolant to reach the surface. More recently, diamond-impregnated spiral polishing instruments such as the Sof-Lex Diamond Polishing System (3M ESPE,
St. Paul, MN) have been introduced and offer an alternative to
paste abrasives.
Nonbonded abrasives are used for air-particle abrasion of restoration surfaces. In dry form, aluminum oxide powders, in 50- to
100-μm sizes, are used to prepare internal crown and veneer surfaces for cementation and bonding procedures. Desiccated silica
glass beads are similarly used to remove investment materials from
pressed ceramic castings.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which procedure will ensure that progressively finer abrasives completely
remove scratches made by previous coarse abrasives?

Finishing and Polishing Procedures
Dental abrasives have many uses in both clinical and laboratory
settings. They are used for dental prophylaxis procedures and for
the adjustment and preparation of natural tooth structures. They
are used extensively for bulk reduction and contouring, finishing, and polishing of the wide array of available dental materials. Therefore abrasives are available in a variety of hardnesses and

come in the form of powders; pastes; nickel-plated diamond burs;
and bonded abrasive stones, discs, wheels, points, and cups. The
best choice for any dental application depends on the substrate
material type, the substrate’s initial surface quality, and the operator’s specific needs. Specific needs vary from cutting or rough
grinding to final polishing to achieve a desired luster or gloss.
Almost all direct restorative materials have an initial softer
state that can be preshaped to achieve a near-final form prior to
hardening; so, again, finer abrasives are generally required to finish and polish direct restorations. An ideal abrasive instrument
will perform removal of surface material, and the abrasive binder
will release worn abrasive particles to expose newer, sharper ones
as the finishing operation proceeds before potentially damaging
heat is generated as a result of lack of abrasion from particle loss or
the instrument clogging with debris. Hard materials such as metal
alloys and ceramics require harder abrasives with strong binders,
whereas softer resin-based composites do not. Although flexible
abrasive discs designed for contouring and polishing resin-based
composites can be used on metal alloys, they are only useful for
final polishing because even though their abrasive particles are sufficiently strong, their adhesive binders are weak.
The physical form and stiffness of a polishing instrument also
affects the manner of material removal and the surface finish. For
example, Sof-Lex and Sof-Lex XT Extra Thin (3M ESPE, St. Paul,
MN) contouring and polishing discs for resin-based materials are
available in the same four abrasive grades: course, medium, fine,
and superfine. Sof-Lex discs have soft, flexible backings, whereas
the XT discs have thinner, stiffer backings. Although light or heavy
pressure can be applied with either style disc, the softer backing of
the Sof-Lex disc allows the disc to flex and adapt more readily to
rounded surfaces, especially at lower rotational speeds. The thinner, stiffer XT discs are designed to access tighter spaces without
buckling for the development of anatomy like narrow embrasure
contours. When placed against rounded contours, XT discs tend
to create flat spots because of their stiffness. Both forms yield
specific advantages in specific areas of application. These discs
are color coded, with darker colors representing coarser grades of
abrasives. However, abrasive discs and strips available from other
manufacturers may not follow the same coding scheme.
Comprehensive restorative material finishing sets are becoming increasingly popular in that they provide for finishing and
polishing of all areas of the restoration. Many come in singleuse set packaging for better infection control. For example, the

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

345

• Figure 16-13 The Astropol polishing kit comprises four shapes made with three grit sizes—prepolish
(blue), polish (green), and high-gloss polish (pink)—and polishers suitable for both resin composite materials and amalgam. (Courtesy Ivoclar Vivadent.)

Astropol finishing and polishing set (Figure 16-13; Ivoclar Vivadent, Amherst, NY) for composites and ceromers comes in four
different instrument shapes and three levels of abrasiveness. The
four shapes provide for interdental and occlusal applications, and
the three abrasive grades, Astropol F, Astropol P, and Astropol HP,
allow for prepolishing, polishing, and high-gloss polishing, respectively. Polishing systems are available from dental abrasive instrument manufacturers for each category of dental materials.
The manufacturers also provide information about the abrasive instruments, such as the type of abrasive and binder used,
intended applications, recommended speed of the instrument,
storage, sterilization, coolant requirement, and block for dressing. The laboratory technician and clinician should familiarize
themselves with the instructions for use (IFUs) provided for the
instrument selected and recommendations to avoid cross-contamination of instruments used between certain materials.

Resin-Based Composite Restorations
Dental composites are among the most difficult types of materials to predictably finish and polish to a high luster because they
contain a relatively soft resin matrix and hard fillers of various
sizes in their structures. Figure 16-14 shows the surface roughness values, in root mean squares (Rrms), of some resin-based
composites when finished with Al2O3 discs and then subjected
to 20,000 toothbrushing cycles with dentifrices. The differences
in values mean that there must be selective grinding associated
with the soft resin matrix and the harder particle fillers. In addition, the final finish of a composite restoration depends on the
composition, cavity design, curing effectiveness, and postcuring time needed to achieve the restoration’s final properties. For
some composite materials, delayed finishing is recommended to
allow more polymerization to occur. Manufacturers’ recommendations often include the thickness of increments and the curing time needed with a light-curing unit of known irradiance in
mW/cm2.

Filtek Supreme Plus-Translucent
(3M ESPE)

Polished

Tetric EvoFlow
(Ivoclar Vivadent)

Brushed

Miris 2
(Coltene/Whaledent)
Filtek LS
(3M ESPE)
Herculite XRV
(Kerr Dental)
Ketac Nano
(3M ESPE)
Filtek Supreme Plus-A2 Enamel
(3M ESPE)
TPH
(Dentsply Caulk)

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Surface Roughness, Rrms (µm)

• Figure 16-14 Surface roughness (Rrms) of various resin-based composites after polishing with Al2O3 discs and then subjecting to 20,000 toothbrushing cycles with paste dentifrice at 200 g of weight. (Adapted from
Phark J-H et al: Influence of tooth brushing on surface roughness of restorative materials. AADR Abstract #1052, 2010.)

The finishing and polishing technique consists of three essential steps: First, contour the restoration either with 12-fluted carbide burs, 30- to 100-μm diamond burs, or coarse abrasive-coated
discs, depending on the dentist’s preference. Next, finish with 16to 30-fluted carbide burs, fine and extra-fine diamond burs, white
stones, white Arkansas stones, or medium and fine abrasive-coated
discs. Finally, polish with fine and extra-fine polishing paste (alumina or diamond); extra-fine abrasive-coated discs; silicon carbide–impregnated brushes; or diamond-impregnated rubber
polishing discs, cups, or points. Most finishing and polishing systems, whether impregnated or coated with abrasive, are available

346

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

in a variety of color-coded kits (Figure 16-13). The manufacturers’
instructions for their use must be followed to obtain the optimal
outcome.
During each stage of finishing and polishing, the operator
should proceed in one direction only. Then, after the use of the
next abrasive in the sequence, polishing should continue in a
direction perpendicular to the previous one. This process ensures
that scratches become more visible and that the effectiveness of
scratch removal can be assessed more rapidly. The recommended
abrasives and polishing instruments should be used in the proper
sequence, and intermediate abrasive steps should never be
skipped. For example, following a coarse abrasive disc with a fine
abrasive rather than a medium-grit abrasive would leave some of
the scratches produced by the coarse abrasive. The operator can
choose to use one system from start to finish (e.g., abrasive-coated
or flexible abrasive-impregnated rubber discs) or combine different systems based on preference and the location of the restoration
(e.g., sandpaper for anterior or a brush for posterior sites).

Dental Amalgam
Burnishing prior to carving allows for the removal of the excess
mercury and improves marginal adaptation and burnishing after
carving improves smoothness. However, burnishing alone will not
provide a completely scratch- and retention-free surface for amalgam restorations (Figure 8-12, A). Slow-speed handpieces should
be used for finishing and polishing amalgam restorations. In the
past, a recommendation was made to wait 24 hours before polishing amalgam restorations to allow amalgam to set completely.
However, if the restoration’s surface is finished initially with a very
fine prophylaxis paste applied with a cotton pellet or a nonribbed
rubber prophy cup rotated at slow speed and light pressure, a
smooth, velvety finish is achieved that will acquire a luster as the
restoration is abraded normally in the mouth. Spherical amalgams
set faster and can be finished and polished sooner.
If amalgam has hardened to an advanced stage in which the
abrasion by a fine prophylaxis paste is no longer effective, the following procedure may be used at the next dental appointment: (1)
Contour with slow-speed green stones or diamond burs or brown
and green rubber points, and (2) apply a mixture of fine pumice
and water or alcohol with a rotary brush or felt wheel to polish
the surface.

points (brown and green); (3) apply fine abrasive-impregnated rubber wheels, cups, and points; and (4) apply tripoli or rouge with rag
or leather wheels, if necessary.
Predominantly base-metal alloys, on the other hand, typically
exhibit much higher hardness and yield strengths. They are much
harder to finish. Burnishing these alloys is practically impossible.
A similar sequence is followed for predominantly base-metal alloys
but with more durable abrasive instruments that contain stronger binders. This means that the same carbide burs, stones, and
rubber-bonded abrasive instruments will degrade faster when used
on the harder alloys. If possible, select instruments with stronger abrasive binders that can withstand the higher abrasive forces
generated on these alloys. Fortunately, most manufacturers offer
material-specific lines of carbide burs and bonded abrasive wheels
and points.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the differences between finishing and polishing a ceramic
restoration extraorally and intraorally?

Ceramic Restorations
The ideal surface for a ceramic restoration is a polished and glazed
one. Esthetic areas are typically contoured and textured first before
being polished to a desired level of luster. Proximal and functional
contact areas must always be brought to their smoothest state in
order to cause the least possible wear under function. Natural
glaze (autoglaze) is preferred over the application of glaze ceramic
(overglaze). A natural glaze wears less over time because the glaze
is a fused surface of the underlying porcelain material as opposed
to a coating of weaker add-on glaze ceramic. Natural glazing is
not possible for zirconia and lithia disilicate. After polishing is
completed, the only glaze option is the application of glaze ceramics on esthetic, nonfunctional areas. Glazing does not necessarily
yield a smooth surface if the initial ceramic surface has significant
roughness. A desired smooth ceramic surface should be produced
through careful extraoral polishing prior to any glazing procedure.
Extraoral finishing and polishing instruments (Figure 16-15)
come in a wider variety, and access to all areas of the restoration

Dental Alloys
Pure gold, a noble metal, is a very soft and ductile metal. Gold is
almost never used in the purest form for dental restorations. Recall
the discussion in Chapter 2, Solid-State Reactions in High-Noble
and Noble Alloy Systems, that when alloyed with other metals such
as silver and copper, the resultant gold alloy becomes sufficiently hard
to withstand masticatory forces without creep or distortion. Many
dentists still prefer high-noble alloys because of their workability and
adaptability. This quality can be considered a favorable combination
of an adequately low yield strength with sufficient percent elongation
to allow for the burnishing of restoration margins. Lower-hardness
noble-metal alloys require a different finishing approach from that
used for the harder, predominantly base-metal alloys used in dentistry. Slow-speed handpieces should be used for finishing and polishing gold and softer noble alloys. This technique consists of the
following steps: (1) Contour with fine carbide burs, green stones
(silicon carbide) or heatless stones; (2) finish with pink or white
stones or medium-grade abrasive-impregnated rubber wheels and

• Figure 16-15 Extraoral porcelain finishing kit. Note bands on the mandrels (shanks) to distinguish the levels of abrasiveness. No band indicates
a standard prepolisher, yellow indicates a polisher, and white indicates a
super-polisher. (Courtesy Dr. Farzan Pouranfar.)

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

is possible. Intraorally, only minor roughness can be successfully polished with a different set of instruments (Figure 16-16)
without compromising the surface quality. Frictional heat is
detrimental to all ceramic materials, so adequate cooling is necessary whenever ceramic restorations are finished and polished. The
use of an air/water spray device and the maintenance of intermittent contact between the restoration and the rotary instrument are
critical during any intraoral adjustment operation. Continuous
contact between the restoration and the rotary instrument should
be avoided.
Manufacturers normally produce material-specific ceramic finishing and polishing kits based on the hardness and composition
of the ceramic. Figure 16-17 shows a typical set of two kits for
zirconia-based ceramics. Again, the manufacturers’ IFUs should
be followed when these systems are used.
Many new CAD-CAM ceramic materials come in a softer, more
machinable, presintered state and are intended to be machined
then prepolished prior to final sintering. They are designed this
way in order to permit grinding with reduced chipping damage
to delicate restoration margins, in addition to reducing wear on

347

milling burs. Depending on the dentist’s preference, a general
technique is as follows: (1) Contour or mill the ceramic surface
with bonded synthetic or natural diamond burs, wheels, and discs;
(2) separate milling sprues if necessary, texture, and prefinish with
synthetic diamond or aluminum-oxide stones followed by flexible polymer or rubber-bonded fine abrasive wheels, discs, cups,
and points (typically a two- or three-step process depending on
the material system used); (3) ultrasonically and/or steam-clean
polished surfaces thoroughly; (4) apply an overglaze layer or initiate natural glaze on the ceramic if necessary; and (5) final polish
with ultrafine abrasive-impregnated rubber discs, cups, and points
if necessary. The highest luster may be achieved using a diamond
paste applied with a brush or felt wheel. For intraoral adjustments
and polishing, use intermittent applications of rotary instruments
with copious amount of air/water spray.
Monolithic zirconia, Y-TZP based ceramic materials, is now
widely used. This material is incredibly hard to adjust and polish in a fully sintered state; these procedures can be done with
instruments specifically designed for zirconia (Figure 16-18),
but they are time-consuming. For those providing chairside

• Figure 16-16 Intraoral ceramic polishers for laminate veneer (Dialite intraoral polishers; Brasseler USA).
Abrasive levels are blue (coarse), pink (medium), and gray (fine). (Courtesy Dr. Farzan Pouranfar.)

• Figure 16-17 Typical finishing and polishing kits for zirconia ceramics: extraoral kit for laboratory use
(left) and intraoral kit for chairside use (right). Note that the extraoral kits for laboratory kits contain abrasives that will allow for heavier adjustments. (Courtesy Meisinger USA.)

348

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

CAD-CAM zirconia restorations, carefully contouring and
polishing milled zirconia restorations in their presintered
state is recommended so that the sintered restorations have
a near-perfect surface upon removal from the sintering furnace. This approach greatly reduces or eliminates the need for

postsintering finishing and polishing. Figure 16-19 shows that
milling markings will persist after sintering if not removed. In
addition to time savings, there are two additional advantages
to this approach: avoiding the risk of weakening the restoration from the conversion of the tetragonal zirconia phase to
the monoclinic phase caused by grinding (Chapter 10, Transformation Toughening) and eliminating the risk of creating
a displeasing pearl-like surface appearance to the restoration
from polishing.
As mentioned previously, leaving rough contact surfaces on zirconia restorations is not recommended. Rough zirconia will cause
severe wear of opposing enamel and restorative materials. Glaze
ceramic layers over rough zirconia will eventually wear and expose
the rough-milled surface of the zirconia (Figure 16-20), which can
cause greater wear on opposing enamel surfaces (Figure 16-21).
Lawson and colleagues demonstrated the advantages of placing
polished zirconia and lithia disilicate in opposing contact with
natural enamel.

Acrylic Resins for Denture Bases and Veneers
100m

Acrylic resins and other polymers are relatively soft materials.
To avoid overheating during finishing, a large amount of pumice slurry should be fed to the work surface as the denture is
moved against the rag wheel on the lathe. When using carbide
burs and rubber-bonded polishers, intermittent contact with the
substrate will help avoid overheating. The following technique
is recommended: (1) Contour with tungsten carbide burs and
sandpaper abrasive mandrels; (2) use a rubber-bonded abrasive
point to remove the scratches; (3) depending on the size of the
area that needs to be polished, apply pumice with a rag wheel,
felt wheel, bristle brush, or prophy cup; and (4) apply a mixture
of chalk and alcohol or bar-type acrylic polishing compounds
with a rag wheel.

A

Air-Particle Abrasion Technology
100m

B
• Figure 16-18 Effect of instrument on the polished surface. A, Zirconia
surface finished with a fine diamond bur. B, Zirconia surface polished using
the Dialite/Diashine system for zirconia. (Courtesy Dr. Siegward Heintze.)

As an alternative to the use of rotary instrument cutting, airparticle abrasive systems can deliver a fine, precisely controlled
high-pressure stream of 25- to 30-μm abrasive particles to
remove enamel, dentin, and restorative materials for cavity
preparation. Because air-particle abrasion generates minimal

• Figure 16-19 Effect of sintering on milled and partially prepolished zirconia crown. A, Presintered zirconia crown showing as-milled surface (left) and prepolished surface (right). B, Same restoration after fully
sintering. Note difference in smoothness and that sintering does not remove milling striations. (Courtesy
Dr. Troy Decker.)

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

349

2.0

1.5
mm
1.0
2.0

A

20m

1.5

0.5
1.0 mm
0.5
0.0 0.0

A

B

100m

• Figure 16-21 Scanning electron micrograph images of enamel stylus.
A, Abraded by glazed crowns. B, Abraded by optimally polished crowns.
(Courtesy Dr. Siegward Heintze.)

100m

B
• Figure 16-20 Wear facet of a milled and glazed ceramic after wear

TABLE 16-3

simulation. A, Three-dimensional image generated with FRT MicroProf
sensor. B, A scanning electron micrograph (×100). (Courtesy Dr. Siegward
Heintze.)

Product

heat and vibration, there is relatively little potential for tooth
chipping or microfracturing. These systems have been extended
to the following applications: endodontic access through porcelain crowns, minimal preparation for crown margin repair, tunnel preparations, superficial removal of stains, cleaning of tooth
surfaces before adhesive bonding, and roughening of internal
surfaces of indirect porcelain or composite restorations before
adhesive bonding.

Prophylaxis Paste Selection for Dental Hygiene
Procedures
The composition and particle size of abrasives contained in
various prophy pastes can have adverse effects on exposed
cementum and dentin surfaces and esthetic restorative materials. Table 16-3 shows the mean roughness values obtained

Effect of Prophylaxis Pastes on Glazed
Ceramic Surface Roughness
Surface Roughness

Proxyt coarse (Ivoclar Vivadent, Amherst, NY)

0.183 ± 0.08

Proxyt fine (Ivoclar Vivadent, Amherst, NY)

0.066 ± 0.03

Nupro coarse (Dentsply International, York, PA)

0.209 ± 0.11

Nupro fine (Dentsply International, York, PA)

0.188 ± 0.07

Control (glazed surface)

0.061 ± 0.03

on glazed ceramic surfaces after three rounds of 10-second
application of various prophy pastes by the same operator. Only one of the pastes (Proxyt Fine, Ivoclar Vivadent,
Amherst, NY) did not alter the surface smoothness significantly. Similarly, another study revealed the effect of the same
prophy pastes on the gloss reduction of a polished resin composite (Table 16-4).
Air-particle abrasion has been adapted for removing plaque
and stains from tooth surfaces using a sodium bicarbonate

350

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

slurry; the process is called air polishing. Air-particle abrasion
is more efficient and effective compared with the technique
using a rubber cup and prophylaxis paste because air polishing can access more tooth surfaces. However, softer restoration
surfaces, such as glass ionomer, can be damaged. Therefore
air polishing should be used with caution around cosmetic
restorations.

TABLE 16-4

Effect of Prophy Pastes on Polished
Composite Surface Gloss Reduction,
Measured by Gloss Units, After a
60-Second Application

Dentifrices
Tooth-cleaning substances, such as dentifrices, are available as
toothpastes, gels, and powders. Dentifrices have three important
functions: (1) Their abrasive and detergent actions provide more
efficient removal of debris, plaque, and stained pellicle compared
with the use of a toothbrush alone; (2) they polish teeth to provide
increased light reflectance and superior esthetic appearance, and the
high polish, as an added benefit, enables teeth to resist the accumulation of microorganisms and stains better than rougher surfaces;
and (3) they act as vehicles for the delivery of therapeutic agents
with known benefits—for example, anticaries agents, desensitizing
agents, antimicrobial agents, and antitartar agents.

Product

Mean GU ± SD

Dentifrice Composition

Nupro coarse

−40.86 ± 4.22a

Nupro fine

−40.57 ± 5.64a

Proxyt coarse

−41.61 ± 3.32a

Proxyt fine

−16.24 ± 3.34b

Typical components of dentifrices, along with specific materials
used and purpose, are listed in Table 16-5. The abrasive concentrations in paste and gel dentifrices are lower than those of powder dentifrices. Therefore powder dentifrices should be used more
sparingly and with greater caution by patients, especially where
cementum and dentin are exposed, to avoid excessive dentinal
abrasion and pulpal sensitivity.
Desensitizing agents in toothpastes work by either depolarizing nerve endings to reduce the transmission of pain, such as
with potassium nitrate, or by blocking dentinal tubules, such as
with stannous fluoride, sodium fluoride, and strontium chloride.

GU, gloss unit; SD, standard deviation.
The difference between mean values of groups represented by the same superscripts is not
statistically significant.

TABLE 16-5

Typical Dentifrice Components*
COMPOSITION (wt%)

Component

Pastes and Gels

Powders

Materials

Purpose

Abrasive

20–55

90–98

Calcium carbonate
Dibasic calcium phosphate dihydrate
Hydrated alumina
Hydrated silica
Sodium bicarbonate
Mixtures of listed abrasives

Removes plaque or stain
Polishes tooth surface

Detergent

1–2

1–6

Sodium lauryl sulfate

Aids in debris removal

Colorants

1–2

1–2

Food colorants

Are used for appearance

Flavoring

1–2

1–2

Oils of spearmint, peppermint,
wintergreen, or cinnamon

Provides flavor

Humectant

20–35

0

Sorbitol, glycerine

Maintains moisture content

Water

15–25

0

Deionized water

Acts as suspension agent

Binder

3

0

Carrageenan

As thickener, prevents liquid–solid
separation

Fluoride

0–1

0

Sodium monofluorophosphate
Sodium fluoride
Stannous fluoride

Prevents dental caries

Tartar control agents

0–1

0

Disodium pyrophosphate
Tetrasodium pyrophosphate
Tetrapotassium pyrophosphate

Inhibits formation of calculus above
the gingival margin

Desensitization agents

0–5

0

Potassium nitrate
Strontium chloride, stannous fluoride

Nerve desensitizing agent
Promotes occlusion of dentinal
tubules

*Some compositional information provided by Dr. George Stookey.

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

Antimicrobial agents such as stannous fluoride and triclosan
reduce gingivitis. Products advertised as “whitening toothpastes”
typically contain hydrogen peroxide or carbamide peroxide to
bleach intrinsic stains as an added benefit to the surface-stainremoval mechanism of any abrasive present.

Dentifrice Abrasiveness
Dentifrices do not have to be highly abrasive to clean teeth effectively. This is important because exposed root-surface cementum
is abraded at a rate of 35 times and dentin at 25 times the rate
of enamel. The preferred means of evaluating dentifrice abrasiveness is to employ irradiated dentin specimens and brush them
for several minutes with test and reference dentifrices. An abrasiveness ratio is calculated by dividing the amounts of radioactive
phosphorus (P32) released from the test dentifrice with that from
the reference dentifrice, and this value is multiplied by 1000. A
test dentifrice must obtain an abrasiveness score of 200 to 250
or less to satisfy the abrasiveness test requirements proposed by
the American Dental Association (ADA) and the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO). This means that a test
dentifrice must abrade dentin at 20% to 25% of the rate of the
reference standard to be considered safe for normal usage. A problem with this laboratory test is that the test does not account for
all variables that would affect abrasiveness under in vivo conditions. Some of the factors affecting dentifrice abrasiveness are
listed in Box 16-1.
Another problem is that not all dentifrices respond in a similar manner under this test. Therefore, using this laboratory test
Box 16-1

Factors Affecting Dentifrice Abrasiveness

Extraoral Factors
Abrasive particle type, size, and quantity in dentifrice
Amount of dentifrice used
Toothbrush type
Toothbrushing method and force applied during brushing
Toothbrushing frequency and duration
Patient’s coordination and mental status

Intraoral Factors
Saliva consistency and quantity (normal variations)
Xerostomia induced by drugs, salivary gland pathology, and radiation
therapy
Presence, quantity, and quality of existing dental deposits (pellicle, plaque,
calculus)
Exposure of dental root surfaces
Presence of restorative materials, dental prostheses, and orthodontic
appliances

351

rated four dozen dentifrices with regard to cleaning ability and
abrasiveness. The products are ranked as high, moderate, or low
in abrasiveness. That most of the evaluated products meet the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/ADA and ISO
test requirements is highly probable. Thus these rankings should
be considered a guide to products that do not exceed a maximum
acceptable (safe) abrasiveness value.

Toothbrushes
The bristle stiffness of toothbrushes alone has been shown to have
no effect on the abrasion of hard dental tissues. However, when a
dentifrice is used, there is evidence that more flexible toothbrush
bristles bend more readily and bring more abrasive particles into
contact with tooth structure, albeit with relatively light forces. This
interaction should produce more effective abrasion and cleaning
action on the areas that the bristles can reach. Battery-powered
toothbrushing devices provide a variety of cleansing actions that
are claimed to improve tooth-cleaning actions over those achieved
by manual toothbrushes.

Summary and Recommendations
Lab technicians, dentists, and dental hygienists should carefully select the appropriate abrasive system for each restoration.
Although using the same instruments for grinding and finishing
different materials is convenient, the quality of the finished tooth
or material surfaces may be far less than ideal if the optimal processes and abrasives recommended for specific materials are not
followed. For in vivo processes, use liquid coolant, whenever possible. In situations where a copious supply of liquid coolant is not
possible, intermittent application of polishing pressure should be
performed.
Change the orientation of the polishing path from one abrasive step to the next as successively finer and finer abrasives are
used. Use lighter pressure as the final stages of each abrasive step
are reached. The same grit, applied with lighter pressure, can produce a slightly finer surface. Ideally, use separate polishing instruments or carriers (e.g., brushes or rag wheels) for each abrasive
grit. Completely removing all coarse abrasive particles from an
instrument then reliably using the same instrument for a finer
abrasive is difficult, if not impossible. Inevitably, scratches from
stray coarse abrasive particles can occur. Similarly, thoroughly
clean coarser abrasives from restorations before moving to finer
abrasives. Rinse treated surfaces periodically to remove wear
debris that may interfere with the ability to produce the finest
possible surface finish.

to predict the in vivo abrasiveness of various dentifrices is very
difficult or impossible. However, the majority of modern dentifrices are not exceedingly abrasive. Patients should experience
similar amounts of relative wear from the various dentifrices as
those found in laboratory tests. In fact, one published document

Acknowledgment

Selected Readings

Jones CS, Billington RW, Pearson GJ: The in vivo perception of roughness of restorations, Brit Dent J 196:42–45, 2004.
The tactile ability of the tongue to discern very small changes in surface roughness intraorally are suggested in this study.
Kroschwitz JI, Howe-Grant M, editors: Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia
of Chemical Technology, ed 4, vol 1, New York, 1991, Wiley,
pp 17–37.
This encyclopedia presents a thorough review of specific abrasives,
their physical properties, and their methods of manufacture.

Fruits TJ, Miranda FJ, Coury TL: Effects of equivalent grit sizes utilizing
different polishing motions on selected restorative materials, Quintessence Int 27:279–285, 1996.
Hutchings IM: Tribology: Friction and Wear of Engineering Materials,
Boca Raton, FL, 1992, CRC Press.
This publication thoroughly describes the scientific basis of friction,
wear, and lubrication.

The contributions of Dr. Kenneth Anusavice and Dr. Sibel
Antonson to the development of this chapter in the 11th and
12th editions are appreciated.

352

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Lawson NC, Janyavula S, Syklawer S, et al: Wear of enamel opposing
zirconia and lithium disilicate after adjustment, polishing and glazing,
J Dent 42:1586–1591, 2014.
This article shows that polished zirconia wears less and polished lithium disilicate wears equivalent to natural enamel. Glazes should not
be applied to contacting surfaces.
Mackert JR: Side effects of dental ceramics, Adv Dent Res 6:90–93,
1992.
This article presents information on silicosis and the potential hazards
of porcelain dust generation during grinding procedures.
Nakazato T, Takahashi H, Yamamoto M, et al: Effects of polishing
on cyclic fatigue strength of CAD/CAM ceramics, Dent Mater J
18:395–402, 1999.

Powers JM, Bayne SC: Friction and wear of dental materials. In Henry
SD, editor: Friction Lubrication and Wear Technology, ASM Handbook,
vol 18, Materials Park, OH, 1992, American Society of Metals International, 1992, pp 665–681.
This article, a compilation of information from more than 200
sources, presents a review of friction and wear as they relate to human
dental tissues and restorative materials.
Williamson RT, Kovarik RE, Mitchell RJ: Effects of grinding, polishing,
and over glazing on the flexure strength of a high-leucite feldspathic
porcelain, Int J Prosthodont 9:30–37, 1996.
Yamamoto M: Metal-Ceramics. Chicago, 1985, Quintessence, pp 124–130.
This volume discusses the preparation of metal-ceramic alloys for
porcelain application, including several excellent photographs.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Carr MP, Mitchell JC, Seghi RR, et al: The effect of air polishing on contemporary esthetic restorative materials, Gen Dent 50:238–241, 2002.
This article describes the effects of air polishing on different dental
materials.
Cooley RL: Aerosol hazards. In Goldman HS, Hartman KS, Messite J,
editor: Occupational Hazards in Dentistry, Chicago, 1984, Yearbook
Medical, pp 21–33.
Sources of dental aerosols, their hazards, and preventive measures are
presented.
Fairhust CW, Lockwood PE, Ringle RD, et al: The effect of glaze on
porcelain strength, Dent Mater 8:203–207, 1992.
Fruits TJ, Miranda FJ, Coury TL: Effects of equivalent grit sizes utilizing
different polishing motions on selected restorative materials, Quintessence Int 27:279–285, 1996.
González-Cabezas C, Hara AT, Hefferren J: Abrasivity testing of dentifrices—challenges and current state of the art, Monogr Oral Sci
23:100–107, 2013.
Hefferren JJ: Laboratory method for assessment of dentifrice abrasivity,
J Dent Res 55:563–573, 1976.
This reference describes the dentifrice abrasiveness test.
Hutchings IM: Leonardo da Vinci’s studies of friction, Wear 360–361:
51−56, 2016.
This reference provides insightful analysis of Leonardo’s unpublished
experiments in friction using his original diagrams.
Hutchings IM: Tribology: Friction and Wear of Engineering Materials,
Boca Raton, FL, 1992, CRC Press.
This publication thoroughly describes the scientific basis of friction,
wear, and lubrication.
Jones CS, Billington RW, Pearson GJ: The in vivo perception of roughness of restorations, Brit Dent J 196:42–45, 2004.
The tactile ability of the tongue to discern very small changes in surface roughness intraorally are suggested in this study.
Kroschwitz JI, Howe-Grant M, editors: Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, ed 4, vol 1, New York, 1991, Wiley, pp 17–37.
This encyclopedia presents a thorough review of specific abrasives,
their physical properties, and their methods of manufacture.
Lawson NC, Janyavula S, Syklawer S, et al: Wear of enamel opposing
zirconia and lithium disilicate after adjustment, polishing and glazing,
J Dent 42:1586–1591, 2014.
This article shows that polished zirconia wears less and polished lithium disilicate wears equivalent to natural enamel. Glazes should not
be applied to contacting surfaces.

352.e1

Mackert JR: Side effects of dental ceramics, Adv Dent Res 6:90–93, 1992.
This article presents information on silicosis and the potential hazards
of porcelain dust generation during grinding procedures.
Nakazato T, Takahashi H, Yamamoto M, et al: Effects of polishing on
cyclic fatigue strength of CAD/CAM ceramics, Dent Mater J 18:395–
402, 1999.
Phark J-H, Huh I, Botta AC, Duarte S, et al: Influence of tooth brushing
on surface roughness of restorative materials, J Dent Res 89(Special
Issue A):1052, 2010.
Powers JM, Bayne SC: Friction and wear of dental materials. In Henry
SD, editors: Friction Lubrication and Wear Technology, ASM Handbook
vol 18, Materials Park, OH, 1992, American Society of Metals International, pp 665–681.
This article, a compilation of information from more than 200
sources, presents a review of friction and wear as they relate to human
dental tissues and restorative materials.
Proxyt Scientific Documentation, Ivoclar Vivadent, 2011: http://www.ivoclarvivadent.us/en-us/download-center/scientific-documentation/#P.
This document outlines the principles of professional prophylaxis,
including the properties of prophy pastes and their effects on dental
tissues and various restorative surfaces.
Ratterman E, Cassidy R: Abrasives. In Lampman SR, Woods M, Zorc TP,
editors: Engineered Materials Handbook, vol 4, Ceramics and Glasses,
Materials Park, OH, 1991, American Society of Metals International,
pp 329–335.
A system for selecting abrasives for glasses and ceramics based on a
comparison of physical properties is presented. Mechanical property
tables are presented for several materials.
Stookey GK, Burkhard TA, Schemehorn BR: In vitro removal of stain
with dentifrices, J Dent Res 61:1236–1239, 1982.
The method used to measure the cleaning effectiveness of a dentifrice
is presented.
Williamson RT, Kovarik RE, Mitchell RJ: Effects of grinding, polishing,
and over glazing on the flexure strength of a high-leucite feldspathic
porcelain, Int J Prosthodont 9:30–37, 1996.
Yamamoto M: Metal-Ceramics, Chicago, 1985, Quintessence, pp 124–130.
This volume discusses the preparation of metal-ceramic alloys for porcelain application, including several excellent photographs.
Yazici AR, Antonson D, Campillo-Funollet M, et al: Effect of prophylactic pastes on composite surface gloss, J Dent Res 90(Special Issue
A):3046, 2011.
This abstract outlines the study showing the effect of different prophylactic pastes on the gloss of resin composite.

Part V

Assessing Dental Restorations
17 Biocompatibility, 355
18 In Vitro Research on Dental Materials, 381
19 Clinical Research on Restorations, 390
20 Emerging Technologies, 401

353

