prosthesis.
Preventive dental material Cement, coating, or restorative material that either seals pits and fissures or releases a therapeutic
agent, such as fluoride and/or mineralizing ions, to prevent or
arrest the demineralization of the tooth structure.
Restorative dental material Metallic, ceramic, metal-ceramic, or
resin-based substance used to replace, repair, or rebuild teeth

and/or enhance esthetics. A direct restorative material is placed
in the tooth preparation and is transformed to be a restoration. An indirect restorative material is fabricated extraorally to
produce prostheses.
Temporary restorative material Cement or resin-based composite used for a period ranging from a few days to several
months to temporarily restore or replace missing teeth or tooth
structure until a definitive, lasting prosthesis or restoration can
be placed.

Dentists and engineers have similar long-range objectives in their
professions—that is, to design, construct, apply, and evaluate devices
or structures of materials that can be subjected to a wide range of
environmental conditions. They must have a thorough knowledge
of the properties and behavioral characteristics of the materials they
intend to use. However, dentists need to make proper diagnoses,
prevent dental caries, and surgically treat the affected tooth structures. Subsequently, they must select a material, or materials, for
either direct or indirect applications aiming to restore the patient’s
intraoral functions. The science of dental materials covers a broad
range of terminology, composition, microstructure, and properties
used to describe or predict the performance of materials developed
for dental applications. Previous courses in mathematics, chemistry,
and physics should have prepared you to read this book and understand the terms and principles involved in describing the behavior
of these materials as they are used clinically and in the testing laboratories of academia, governmental facilities, and industry.
Properties of materials can be categorized into chemical and
physical properties. Chemical properties are generally composed of
the composition and behavior of materials in a chemical environment, regardless of any interaction with other external influences.
These properties will be presented in chapters where specific materials are discussed. Physical properties (Chapter 3, Introduction) are
measurable variables that describe how an object looks, feels, or acts
when the object is probed by external agents, such as heat, light,
moisture, or force. Mechanical properties are an aspect of physical
properties, primarily related to the behavior of materials in response

to externally applied forces or pressures (Chapter 4, What Are
Mechanical Properties?). In a clinical environment, the behavior of
dental materials may depend on several variables simultaneously,
but our ability to differentiate primary from secondary factors or
properties will allow us to easily understand or predict a material’s
performance. Furthermore, this potential to predict clinical performance will allow us to analyze the causes of structural degradation and failure of these materials when they no longer serve their
intended functions in the oral cavity.
In this chapter, we will describe the function of the oral cavity,
the structure of the tooth, potential issues involving teeth that
require intervention, categories of materials by application, challenges to these materials in restoring the function of the teeth,
safety issues of dental materials, the future need for dental biomaterials, and the organization of the book.

The Oral Cavity
As an anatomical space and part of the head and neck, the oral
cavity consists of the lips, cheeks, minor salivary glands, gingiva,
tongue, hard palate, and teeth. As part of human evolution, the
oral cavity developed to allow humans to ingest food, chew, swallow, breathe, and speak.
In addition, the oral cavity is a food processor for the body.
The presence and colonization of bacteria, along with distinct teeth
anatomy, saliva, and chewing (motion), begin the breakdown of
food and initiate the digestive process. Therefore humans are able
3

4

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

to obtain the nutrients necessary for survival. Furthermore, both
biting and chewing require upper and lower jaws, muscles, and
teeth working in unity to achieve this goal. A distinctive component
required in this interaction (Figure 1-1, A) to cut and grind food
is force. You will find throughout this book that the term force is
often used, so a proper presentation of the term is warranted.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How is force generated, and how do we measure the quantity of force?

What Is Force?
In classical physics, force is defined as the interaction between two
objects during the action of push or pull. When opposing teeth
come into contact during occlusion, an interaction occurs, and
forces act upon the teeth in contact. Thus one can say that force
exists as the result of an interaction, or when two objects contact
one another. According to Newton’s third law of motion, for every
action, there is an equal and opposite reaction, or in other words,
for every interaction, there is a pair of forces going in opposite
directions coming from both objects (Figure 1-1, B). When this
interaction ceases, or when teeth do not occlude, the two objects
no longer experience force. However, not all interaction requires
physical contact. For example, objects fall to the ground because
the earth’s gravity constantly pulls objects toward the earth.
Force is a vector that has direction and magnitude. The quantity of force is measured using a unit known as Newton, abbreviated with an “N.” One Newton is the amount of force required
to give a 1-kg mass an acceleration of 1 m/s2, which means that
1 N = 1 kg · m/s2. Acceleration makes a stationary object come
into movement. We know that the Earth’s gravitational acceleration is about 9.8 m/s2. Therefore gravity exerts a force of 9.8 N
on an object with a mass of 1 kg. If this object is resting on a
tabletop, a force of 9.8 N will be exerted on the area of contact. Furthermore, if we assume this area of contact is 100 mm2
(= 1 × 10–4 m2), and we divide the applied force by the area, we
obtain a value of 0.098 N/mm2 (= 9.8 × 104 N/m2) for the force,
known as pressure, on the surface. The International System (SI)
unit of pressure is N/m2, which is also called Pascal (Pa). The force
applied by the weight of the object is distributed throughout the
supporting substrate as internal stress and can cause a strain, or
deformation of the substrate. Stress is calculated by dividing the
force by the cross-sectional area of the substrate and has the same

SI unit as pressure. The concept of stress and strain will be discussed in Chapter 4, Stress and Strain.

Mastication and Clenching Forces
The range of biting forces varies markedly from one area of the
mouth to another and from one individual to another. The most
quoted maximum bite forces range from 400 to 890 N for molar
teeth, 222 to 445 N for premolars, 133 to 334 N for canines, and
89 to 111 N for incisors. Although there is considerable overlap,
biting force generally is greater for males compared with females
and for young adults compared with children.
A 2002 study reported a mean clenching force of 462 N, with a
range of 98 to 1031 N for individuals between the ages of 28 and
76 (mean age = 46) who had lost their posterior teeth. In comparison, subjects with a complete dentition exerted a mean clenching
force of 720 N with a range of 244 to 1243 N. If a force of 756 N is
applied to a cusp tip over an area equivalent to 3.9 mm2, the compressive stress would be 193 MPa (1 MPa = 1 × 106 Pa). If the area
is smaller, then the stress within the cusp would be proportionately greater. The Guinness Book of Records (1994) lists the highest
human bite force as 4337 N sustained for 2 s. The average maximum sustainable bite force is approximately 756 N.
Taking this information into consideration, one may ask what
attributes or characteristics allow the tooth to sustain such force.
Let us pause and familiarize ourselves with the structures of the
tooth.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the structure of the tooth enable resistance to fracture from
occlusal loading?

Structure of Teeth
In the oral cavity, teeth are firmly joined to the upper and lower
jaws by tooth-supporting connective tissues (cementum, periodontal ligament). This assembly of tissues ensures enough
flexibility to withstand the forces of mastication and act as thermal
and chemical insulators. Teeth perform important functions in
the oral cavity. The front teeth can grab and cut food to a size that
is suitable for the mouth (bite-size). They also have a role in speech
and contribute to facial aesthetics. The posterior teeth’s morphology is designed to grind the bite-size food into smaller sizes, which
facilitates food passage from the throat to the stomach.
At the teeth’s full formation and physiological capacity, they
will have the following structures: enamel, dentin, enamel-dentin
junction, pulp, and cementum (Figure 1-2).

Enamel

A

B

• Figure 1-1 Interaction between teeth. A, Natural human dentition of
an adult patient showing upper and lower teeth in full-occlusion contact.
B, Forces acting on teeth at occlusion.

Dental enamel is a biologically ceramic composite made of precisely arranged 20-nm-diameter fibrous apatite crystals (92 to 94
vol%). The meaning of composite will be discussed in Chapter 2,
Composite Materials. The remaining nonmineral content (2 to
4 wt%) is represented by water, lipids, and several peptides. This
small amount of nonmineral components, along with its hierarchical anisotropic structure, regulates the mechanical properties of
enamel to respond to the tooth’s functional needs, such as strength
and resistance to wear upon loading. On a micrometer scale, enamel
contains rod and interrod structures (Figure 1-3), beginning at the
enamel-dentin junction and extending to the tooth surface. The

CHAPTER 1

ability of the rigid rod structure, along with the organic interrod
component, to weaken the stress concentration at the crack tip, if
present, improves the resistance of the enamel to fracture from the
stress generated at the surface contact.

Dentin
Dentin is a composite mineralized tissue that contains less mineral than enamel and is composed of nanocrystalline carbonated
hydroxyapatite (Figure 1-4). The organic content (30 vol%)
is almost exclusively type I collagen fibrils plus noncollagen
proteins, such as proteoglycans. In addition, this tissue has a
peculiar morphological feature: the presence of tubules extending
from the enamel-dentin junction to the pulp. These tubules have

Enamel
Dentin-enamel
junction
Gingiva

Pulp
chamber

Dentin

Cementum

Periodontal
ligament

Alveolar
bone

Spongy
bone

Cortical
bone

• Figure 1-2 Schematic cross-sectional view of a natural anterior tooth
and supporting tissues.

Overview of Dental Materials

diameters varying from 2.5 μm near the pulp tissue to 0.8 μm at
the enamel-dentin junction. They also run transverse to the root
or in an S-shape in the crown. This anisotropic, hierarchically oriented, and less mineralized microstructure serves as a foundation,
shapes the roots, and protects the pulp. When loaded intraorally
and force is applied parallel to the tubules, dentin responds better
mechanically than when loads are applied perpendicularly.

Dentin-Enamel Junction
Between the harder, brittle enamel and the softer, durable (tough)
dentin, a functionally graded junction, the dentin-enamel junction (DEJ), is present, allowing a smooth transition of loads from
the enamel to the dentin (Figure 1-5). This interface inhibits the
propagation of cracks from the enamel to the dentin, thus supporting the tooth’s integrity during masticatory actions. Even
though fracture lines between enamel and dentin appear as a result
of continuous masticatory action and/or occasional impact loading, enamel infrequently debonds from dentin, making the DEJ
highly resistant to damage.

Cementum
Cementum is a mineralized tissue covering the entire root surface of
the tooth. Cementum is composed of water, organic matrix, and mineral. About 50% of the dry mass is inorganic and consists of hydroxyapatite crystals. The remaining organic matrix is largely made up of
collagen and, to a lesser degree, glycoproteins and proteoglycans.
The main function of cementum is to support or anchor the tooth,
together with the principal periodontal fibers and alveolar bone.

Pulp
The dental pulp is centrally located in the pulp cavity and quite
often resembles the external surface of the tooth. This specialized,
loose, fibrous connective tissue is composed of collagen fibrils
and organic ground substance composed of 75% water and 25%
organic material. As an organ, the pulp fulfills key physiological
functions, namely, formative or developmental (generates dentin),
nutritive (supplies nutrients and moisture through the vascular
system), protective (responds to injury and noxious stimuli), and

C
C
C
R

A

5

C

B

• Figure 1-3 Transmission electron microscope images of sound enamel. A, High-resolution image of
enamel depicting the structural organization between rods (R) and interrods (C) (×3K). B, Ultrahigh-resolution image showing the distribution of crystal in one rod (white star). The semiwhite spaces between
crystals are porosities (×200K).

6

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

A

B

• Figure 1-4 Scanning electron microscopy images of fractured sound dentin specimens. A, Massive
presence of open tubules (×400). B, Higher magnification of a longitudinal fracture allowing the visualization of intertubular dentin (PD), peritubular dentin (white index), and the organic structure lying free within
the dentinal tubule know as lamina limitans (white arrow) (×4000).

• Figure 1-5 Scanning electron microscopy image of the dentin-enamel
junction region of sound human tooth showing dentin (D), enamel (E), and
dentinal tubule (T). The pointers depict the smooth transition between
the enamel and dentin. Because of the structural difference between the
enamel and the dentin, cohesive separation at the interphase, indicated by
Δ, is an artifact from sample preparation.

sensory (nerve fiber network transmits afferent pain). Whenever
possible, especially while using dental materials, preserving the
health of such vital tissue is highly desired.

Potential Issues and Treatments Associated
With Teeth
Taking into consideration the lifespan and lifestyle of humans, there
are three categories of issues that may affect and change the normal
appearance, structure, position, and function of teeth to undesirable
outcomes that require intervention to restore their function. These
categories are biological, genetic, and mechanical in nature.

Biological Issue
The oral cavity is an open ecosystem with the most diverse microbial
communities in the body and is constantly under threat. The oral
cavity is also where digestion of food begins (solid and liquid) and
the apparatus that humans use to communicate. In this environment,
the inevitable interaction between bacteria, saliva, oral hygiene, and
diet can lead to health or disease. If such interaction favors a balance

among these factors, then oral health is promoted. On the other
hand, if an imbalance takes place (i.e., poor oral hygiene and highsugar diet), carious lesions will develop, leading to superficial (S),
moderate (M), and deep (D) active lesions (Figure 1-6).
Superficial active carious lesions are usually located at the
enamel level only and appear chalky (Figure 1-6, A). If these
lesions are located on smooth buccal or lingual surfaces, they are
known as white spot lesions (WSLs). WSLs can be treated by application of either highly fluoridated materials or through the infiltration of polymerizable, unfilled, low-viscosity adhesive resins. If
the superficial lesions are present in grooves, pit and fissure sealants are used. Clinically, placing sealants in noncarious grooves is
recommended for pediatric and adolescent patients at high caries
risk. All treatments discussed do not involve surgical intervention
but utilize, in part, the porosity of tooth structure caused by the
carious process for infiltration of fluoride ions or fluid polymerizable monomers for protection against further acid attack. Moderate to deep carious lesions indicate loss of tooth structures, quite
often with exposed dentin substrate (Figure 1-6, A & B). Unfortunately, these clinical occurrences require the use of sharp burs and/
or hand instruments to remove the affected tissues and reshape the
remaining tooth structures to accommodate the restorative dental biomaterial selected. The materials can be composites, ceramics, or metals, as will be discussed later. A myriad of preparation
designs (reshaping), such as cavity preparation, inlays, onlays, and
full crowns, are available. In cases of extensive carious lesions that
affect several teeth, partial or even full-mouth teeth extraction
is the only solution. To recover the patient’s ability to chew and
speak in the case of tooth loss from extraction or trauma, prosthetic appliances such as dental bridges, implants, and complete
dentures are used.

Genetic Issue
Across the world, in all countries and cultures, observing people
with misaligned or deficient bites when they smile or speak is
not uncommon. Such phenomena, termed malocclusion, can be
caused by extra teeth, lost teeth, impacted teeth, or abnormally
shaped teeth. A small underdeveloped jaw, caused by a lack of
masticatory stress during childhood, can cause tooth overcrowding (Figure 1-7, A). Crowding of the teeth can be treated with
orthodontics, often through planned tooth extractions, clear
aligners, and/or dental braces. Braces are sets of flexible metal
wires and brackets made of metal or ceramic materials. Brackets
are cemented to the teeth (Figure 1-7, B), and wires are tightened

CHAPTER 1

Overview of Dental Materials

7

M

D
S

B

A

• Figure 1-6 Active carious lesions in anterior teeth. A, Chalky appearance of demineralized enamel
represents superficial (S) carious lesion, and dark-brown exposed dentin shows deep (D) carious lesion.
B, Medium (M) carious lesion represented by the loss of enamel before exposing dentin.

A

B

C

• Figure 1-7 Genetic issue. A, Misaligned lower anterior teeth. B, Ceramic/metal-base orthodontic braces were bonded to the enamel to move teeth to proper position. C, A metal wire is attached to the lingual
enamel of the lower anterior teeth to prevent drifting of the teeth, which would compromise the planned
clinical outcome. (Courtesy Dr. Adalberto Paula Souza, Jr.)

and adjusted over time so that the elastic properties of the wire
gradually apply enough force to move the teeth into the desired
alignment. However, teeth naturally tend to drift out of place,
even after treatment with braces. As a result, wearing a retainer
made of wires and acrylic resin or wires bonded to the tooth
(Figure 1-7, C) may be needed to keep newly aligned teeth from
moving.

Mechanical issue
The interaction between opposing teeth that enables the size
reduction of food also leads to the wearing down of teeth, which
is known as attrition and is often associated with masticatory
force and parafunctional activity. Attrition mostly causes wear of
the incisal and occlusal surfaces of the teeth. Although a certain
degree of attrition is normal, unnecessary loss of tooth structure
at the cementum-enamel junction can also occur in the presence
of unbalanced stresses, friction, biocorrosion (chemical, biochemical, and electrochemical degradation), or a combination
of these. Studies have reported that the prevalence of attrition in
the population can reach as high as 75%. Clinical examples are
bruxism/clenching, caused by repetitive jaw-muscle parafunction
activity leading to occlusal excessive wear; abfraction (static stress

biocorrosion); and abrasion/biocorrosion, caused by the action of
acidic food and/or beverages, as well as toothbrushes, on the surface of the teeth (Figure 1-8). Treatment options that require the
use of dental materials include fabrication of an occlusal guard to
deprogram masticatory muscles and avoid grinding and clenching, restorations to prevent further wear and decrease sensitivity,
and “full-mouth rehabilitation” for severe cases. In cases of tooth
fracture, the extension and remaining amount of the tooth structures dictate the approach (i.e., restoration or extraction) and the
selection of the restorative dental biomaterial.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the differences among preventive, restorative, and auxiliary dental
materials used when constructing a fixed dental prosthesis (FDP)?

Categories of Dental Materials
Dental materials may be fabricated using any of the four classes of
materials: metals, ceramics, polymers, or composites discussed in
Chapter 2. From the viewpoint of intended applications, they are
classified as preventive, restorative, and auxiliary.

8

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

A

B
• Figure 1-8 Noncarious cervical carious lesions. A, Erosion (triangle). B, Biocorrosion (pointers).

A

B

• Figure 1-9 Preventive sealant. A, One sealant (dashed white arrow) that needs repair and an area of a
deep groove planned to receive sealant (pointer). B, Sealant repaired and a new one placed.

After successful treatment of the disease and removal of the infected
tissue, the obvious loss of the tooth structure needs restoration.
Depending on the amount of tooth-structure loss, the restoration
can be a filling, inlay/onlay, full crown, bridge, implant, or denture.
Restorative dental materials consist of synthetic components
that are used to repair or replace tooth structure. They are grouped
by composition, specific function, the type of tooth structure they
are replacing, or method of fabrication. This section will focus
on the method of fabrication, which is classified into direct and
indirect restorative materials. However, a temporary restoration is
often needed before the final definitive restorations are delivered,
especially for indirect restorations.

in foil form, for example, can be used to make dental restorations
(“fillings”) directly on the teeth, but this technique is rarely used
today. Amalgam alloy is a metallic powder containing silver, tin,
and copper, which generates a condensable (moldable) mixture
that allows placement and carving at the intraoral temperature
within a reasonable working time when mixed with mercury.
Once this mixture hardens, the solid exhibits enough strength
to perform duties as a tooth-replacement material (Chapter 8,
Introduction).
In a similar way, glass or ceramic particles of different sizes
(micron to nano), shapes, and compositions are incorporated into
a variety of liquid monomers to generate the so-called resin-based
composite materials. As a result, composite materials of different viscosities and compositions are formulated. Clinically, this
group of materials can be transformed from moldable to a solid
state within a short period of time when two components are
mixed or when a single component, as received, is exposed to a
high-intensity blue light (Figure 1-10). The mechanism of transformation of the former is called chemical polymerization, and
the latter is called photopolymerization, giving dental practitioners timeless control when manipulating, inserting, or sculpting
the material intraorally (Chapter 5, History of Composites). One
unique aspect that characterizes these materials is their capacity
to micromechanically adhere to the teeth and other dental material substrates via bonding mechanisms. This aspect fostered the
concept of minimally invasive dentistry. Their capacity to mimic
or reproduce tooth color is highly relevant.

Direct Restorative Materials
Direct restorative materials are a group of materials placed directly
into a designed tooth preparation that go through a phase transformation from a flowable or moldable state to a functional, solid
state while they are being adapted to the preparation. Pure gold

Indirect Restorative Materials
During their assembly, some restorations and prostheses undergo
intra- and extraoral steps before placement in the oral cavity
(Figure 1-11, A & B). These materials and techniques are meant
to replace large areas of lost tooth structure, in addition to actual

Preventive Materials
Preventive dental materials usually include polymer-based materials that seal susceptible surfaces of the tooth (i.e., pits and fissures)
against caries (Figure 1-9) and/or release fluoride or other therapeutic agents to prevent or inhibit the progression of tooth decay
(dental caries). The service life of restorative materials may be limited to a short-term application (up to several months) or moderately long time periods (1 to 4 years) when they are used to release
therapeutic agents. This is because either the materials deteriorate
as they release the therapeutic agents, or they lose their preventive
capability as the release rates fall below the therapeutic limit.

Restorative Materials

CHAPTER 1

A

Overview of Dental Materials

9

B

• Figure 1-10 Direct composite restoration. A, An active/arrested carious lesion at the lingual surface on
a lower molar tooth. B, After surgical removal of the infected carious tissues, a direct restorative material
was placed.

A

B

C

• Figure 1-11 Indirect ceramic restoration. A, Tooth preparation isolated with rubber dam. B, Indirect ceramic restoration made and adapted to a stone cast. C, Clinical view of the tooth/ceramic assembly after
finishing the adhesive luting steps. (Courtesy Dr. Karine Barizon.)

• Figure 1-13 A set of complete removable dentures. (Courtesy Dr. Maged
• Figure 1-12 A removable partial denture framework in place. The pointers indicate the retentive arms, and the arrows indicate the reciprocal
arms. The wire mesh area between teeth provide sites for retaining artificial
teeth with tissue-colored denture resin.
teeth. They are generally called indirect restorative materials and can
be fixed by cementation (Figure 1-11, C) or remain removable,
like a partial denture held by friction (Figure 1-12), or a complete
denture (Figure 1-13), which is held to soft tissue by wetting. The
issue of wetting will be discussed in Chapter 2, Wetting.
Metals and alloys, because of their mechanical properties,
have been used for making indirect dental prosthetic restorations
that include inlays/onlays, crowns and bridges, removable partial
frameworks, and implants. A metal-ceramic or porcelain fused to
metal (PFM) system is one in which esthetic ceramics are fused
with metal substrates, where the metal functions as a coping,

Abdelaal.)

supporting substructure (Figure 1-14, A). This allows the combination of metal’s strength and ceramic’s esthetics. Metals are crucial components of corrective orthodontic devices, helpful when
aligning crooked teeth, and are used as a base for the placement
of artificial plastic and ceramic teeth (partial denture framework)
and for retentive features (clasps) in partial denture frameworks
(Figure 1-12).
Ceramics, because of their esthetic appearance, have also been
used to restore lost tooth structure partially (inlays/onlays) or
completely (crowns) or to completely replace a missing tooth or
teeth (multiple-unit fixed dental prostheses or bridges). However, because of the need for high fracture resistance and esthetic
appeal, ceramic prostheses are constructed in multiple layers.
The ceramic-ceramic or all-ceramic structure (Figure 1-14, B)
is similar to metal-ceramic system, except that the metal coping

10

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Metal coping
Opaque porcelain

Hot-pressed lithia
disilicate–based
glass-ceramic core

Body porcelain

Add-on incisal porcelain

Incisal porcelain

A

Transparent porcelain

B

Surface stains transparent glaze

• Figure 1-14 Schematic illustration of two crown prostheses. A, A metal-ceramic crown. The gray region
is the metal coping. The remaining color regions represent various types of ceramics used to render esthetic appearance. B, A lithium disilicate all-ceramic crown. The thin metal coping is replaced with a thick
ceramic core, and the multilayer ceramics are replaced with incisal porcelain.

• Figure 1-15 Wax-up of anterior teeth on a gypsum cast. This approach
is an important step in the decision-making process between the patient
and the clinician for the esthetic outcome and surface stains.

waxes to make wax patterns (Figure 1-15) (Chapter 13, Dental
Waxes), investments for metal casting (Chapter 14, Investment
materials), and finishing and polishing abrasives for shaping and
esthetics (Chapter 16, Benefits of Finishing and Polishing Restorative Materials). Additional materials are used in the auxiliary
capacity but are not discussed as auxiliary materials in this book,
such as plastic matrix for composites (Chapter 5, Finishing and
Polishing of Composites), acid-etching solutions for enhancing
bonding of direct restorations (Chapter 6, Historical Background),
metal matrix for amalgam (Chapter 8, Condensation), and acrylic
resins used to make customized impressions and bleaching trays
(Chapter 11, Resin Impression Trays and Tray Materials).

is replaced with a thicker and tougher ceramic core (Chapter 10,
History of Dental Ceramics).

Challenges of Dental Materials in
the Oral Cavity

Temporary and Provisional Restorative Materials
Temporary restorative materials, also known as provisional
restorative materials, are products used for dental restorations that
are not intended for moderate- or long-term applications. Indirect
prostheses can take some time to be created and delivered, so temporary restorations are applied to protect the prepared tooth by
covering any enamel, dentin, or pulp exposed to the buccal environment. These provisional restorations enable patients to speak
and eat normally. Examples include cements for luting provisional
prosthetic restorations; other restoratives used for fillings; orthodontic wires; and acrylic resins used when making provisional
inlays, onlays, crowns, and fixed dental prostheses that span two
or more tooth positions. Depending on the dental procedures
needed, a temporary/provisional restoration may be in service for
several months and up to a year.

The overriding goal of dentistry is to maintain or improve the
quality of life of the patient. This goal can be met by preventing disease, relieving pain, improving the efficiency of mastication, enhancing speech, and improving appearance after tooth
and bone loss. However, dental restorations and appliances,
compared with the natural dentition, endure additional challenges to withstand the oral environment. For example, as a
replacement or addition to the tooth structure, they need to be
retained in place. A strong and durable tooth/material interphase is desirable. They should resist repeated loading during
occlusion. Both factors dictate the longevity of the restoration.
They should be manipulated following very specific instructions
in order to ensure their intraoral performance. The patient’s
acceptance of the restoration is determined by the esthetic
appearance, cost, and the safety of the material. Evidence of
material/tooth integration through the formation of hydroxyapatite also brings the possible need for tissue repair. These
aspects are discussed in the following sections.

Auxiliary Materials
Several different substances are needed to fabricate dental prostheses, appliances, and direct restorations. These substances, however,
do not constitute part of these devices or restorations and, as a
result, are called auxiliary materials. Among these are impression-making materials, gypsum cast materials to make dies, dental

CRITICAL QUESTION
Retention of restorations can be achieved by mechanical or adhesive means;
what are the advantages and disadvantages of these approaches?

CHAPTER 1

Retention of Restorations
Retention, that is, the action of absorbing and continuing to hold
a substance or material, is a highly relevant interfacial mechanism.
Enamel and dentin, for instance, are two different biological
materials held together by a graded interphase varying smoothly
between the two adherent phases. Restorative materials must be
secured to their intended location to be functional. However,
there was no similar interphase available to hold restorative materials to the tooth structure in the beginning of dentistry.
The early approach was to remove the tooth structure, mainly
to provide a location for macromechanical retention and create
resistance to dislodgement of the restorations. The drawback with
this approach is the common clinical observation of cusp fractures resulting from structural flaws of the tooth structure left
by the surgical removal of decayed tissue (Figure 1-16), tooth
pain caused by dentin hypersensitivity, and root canal therapy to
remove hyperemic or necrotic pulp. Although restorations were
retained satisfactorily by mechanical means, the nonadhesive dental materials of the time often left a discontinuity between the
mechanically prepared surface and the restorative material used,
which could lead to new carious lesions and pulp pathologies.
This scenario led to the development of several pulp-protective
philosophies and materials aimed at minimizing the penetration
of bacteria and their by-products into the pulp, in addition to
thermal insulation.
The acid-etching of enamel, combined with fluid resinous
materials adopted in the 1950s, marked the first step toward
generating a continuous interphase between the restoration
and tooth structure. Technically, the process merely transforms
macromechanical to micromechanical retention, with minimal
tooth reduction beyond the removal of decayed tissue. Much
later, etching of dentin with the same agent was accepted, and
our knowledge of the dentin surface structure after etching
expanded. New strategies of bonding, along with the introduction of new materials, have brought the idea of generating a
stable and strong tooth/restoration interphase one step closer.
Although progress has been made, the durability of this interphase remains a challenge. Adhesion and bonding are discussed
in Chapter 6.

Overview of Dental Materials

11

Restoration Longevity in Terms of
Mechanical Integrity
From both a patient’s and a clinician’s perspective, a restoration
should last a lifetime. Although some materials are expected to
last more than a lifetime, in a real-world scenario, the longevity
of restorations is shorter than expected, especially for direct restorations. According to research, dentists spend more than 50%
of their time replacing failed direct restorations. As a result, the
longevity of dental biomaterials used in restorations is extremely
relevant to the profession and to patients.
One of the major advances in the knowledge of dental materials and their manipulation began in 1919, when the U.S. Army
requested the National Bureau of Standards (now known as the
National Institute of Standards and Technology [NIST]) to establish
specifications for the evaluation and selection of dental amalgams
for use in federal service. The dental profession enthusiastically
received these specifications, and similar specifications were subsequently requested for other dental materials. In 1928, dental
research at the National Bureau of Standards was taken over by the
American Dental Association (ADA).
Standards for dental materials have been developed to aid producers, users, and consumers in the evaluation of the safety and
effectiveness of dental products. The ADA’s Standards Committee on Dental Products (SCDP) develops specifications for dental
materials, oral hygiene products, infection-control products,
dental equipment, and dental instruments. Many countries have
a dental standards organization that is charged with the development of test standards to ensure product reliability and safety.
In addition, TC 106 of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) develops international standards. These international standards often require information about composition;
information about physical properties, as obtained by standard test
methods; biocompatibility data; and data covering every provision
of the official specification. More discussion of these standards is
provided in Chapter 18, Standardization of In Vitro Test Methods.
From a material standpoint, meeting the specification for
mechanical properties means the material possesses enough strength
to withstand occlusal loading, but this does not guarantee durability. As mentioned earlier, the placement of dental materials, or
restorations, over tooth structures leads to an interplay between
solid materials and a series of linked and/or nonlinked, complex
joints. The interfacial position at or within the tooth and the
physical quality of the dental materials involved in this complex
assembly have great effects on the longevity of the restoration.
Other factors, such as the selection of materials, clinical indication, patient awareness of their oral hygiene, and manipulation
of and compliance with the dental material manufacturer’s guidelines, will undoubtedly affect the long-term clinical performance
of the restorations. These aspects will be discussed in more detail
in upcoming chapters.

Esthetic Appearance

• Figure 1-16 Fracture of the buccal cusp of a lower first premolar with an
extensive intraorally serviced amalgam restoration. Open arrows delineate
the area of fracture. Even though the amalgam remained firmly retained
by the remaining tooth structure without the support of the lost cusp, it is
considered a failed restoration and needs replacement.

Another important objective of dentistry is to restore or improve
esthetics—the color and appearance of natural dentition—such as
teeth bleaching with whitening agents. In recent decades, esthetic
considerations in restorative and prosthetic materials have increasingly gained greater emphasis, making the development of generalpurpose, technique-insensitive, tooth-colored, and color-stable
restorative materials a mainstream of dental materials research.
Resin-based composite (Chapter 5, Classification of Composites

12

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

by Clinical Use) and ceramics (Chapter 10, Color Matching Ability and Aesthetic Qualities) are the two most notable examples.
Even though esthetic materials that mimic natural dentition in
color, texture, and reflectance allow the clinician to achieve outstanding esthetic and functional results, they also require strong
artistic abilities. For example, knowledge of the underlying scientific principles of color and other optical effects on the appearance
of the restorative material is essential in order to master esthetic
results. Additionally, effective communication among the clinician, technician, and patient is important to achieve the proposed
goal and avoid unrealistic expectations.

Safety of Dental Materials
Standards for dental materials have been developed to aid producers,
users, and consumers in the evaluation of the safety and effectiveness
of dental products. As mentioned previously, national dentistry standards/specifications have been implemented by the ADA’s SCDP,
and international standards have been implemented by the ISO’s
TC 106. Manufacturers can choose between testing their materials
according to either national or international standards. However, for
a manufacturer to market its product in certain European countries,
a European Conformity (CE) marking must be obtained based on
the product’s ability to meet one or more national or international
standards for performance and quality. A CE marking indicates that
the product complies with European guidelines for health, safety,
and environmental protection legislation.
The existence of material-evaluation standards does not prevent the manufacturing, marketing, purchase, or use of dental
or medical devices that do not meet these standards. However,
producers or marketers of products and devices are expected to
meet the safety standards established for those products in the
countries in which they are sold. Thus, a producer may be given
premarket approval in the United States by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) to sell a dental device or restorative
material without that product being tested by the ADA or any
other agency to determine whether the product is in accordance
with the material’s specifications. Nevertheless, these agencies are
becoming increasingly dependent on one another to ensure that
all products marketed worldwide are safe and effective.
For a dental material to be used in the oral cavity, this material
should be harmless to all oral tissues and contain no toxic, leachable,
or diffusible substance that can be absorbed into the circulatory system, causing systemic toxic responses, including teratogenic or carcinogenic effects. The material must also be free of agents that could
elicit sensitization or an allergic response in a sensitized patient.
These are considered general characteristics of biocompatibility.
Because safety is relative, no dental device (including restorative materials) is completely safe. The selection and use of dental
devices or materials assume that the benefits will far outweigh the
known biological risks. However, there is always the possibility
that a patient will experience adverse effects from dental treatment. The conceptual aspects of biocompatibility, with specific
emphasis on the solid and liquid materials of greatest relevance to
dentistry, are presented in Chapter 17.

Capability of Initiating Tissue Repair or
Regeneration
Although restorative dental materials primarily focus on replacing missing tooth structure or missing teeth with synthetic materials, evidence shows that certain materials have triggered healing

or repair of tooth structure. For example, fluoride ions released in
slightly acidic conditions, along with calcium phosphate, can promote the formation of hydroxyapatite within demineralized enamel
matrix or become incorporated into the crystal lattice as fluorapatite, resulting in a lower solubility of enamel. The newly formed
hydroxyapatite, however, lacks the structure and mechanical properties of natural enamel. As a result, the challenge is to develop
biomimetic approaches in re-creating the hierarchical structure on
the surface of the damaged enamel. Another example is when there
is deep cavitation where dental pulp exposure has occurred, and
a pulp capping agent is used. The response of the pulp to these
materials is a biological healing process leading to the formation of
reparative dentin that protects the remaining healthy pulp.
Understanding the underlying mechanisms of this “natural
healing” biological process enables the clinician to pharmacologically trigger this event for promoting reparative dentine formation.
As restorative dentistry is gradually transforming toward biologydriven repair strategies, replacement, and regeneration, the goal is
regeneration of the entire tooth. The current progress in regenerative dentistry is presented in Chapter 20, Regenerative Dentistry.

The Future Need for Dental Biomaterials
Future developments in dentistry and the need for optimal oral
health care will dictate the future of dental materials science. Dentistry will continue to focus on the preservation and enhancement
of oral health through the prevention of caries, periodontal disease, and their sequelae and the rehabilitation of missing, damaged, or destroyed hard and soft tissues. A cure for dental caries
will have a dramatic impact on the use of restorative materials to
restore form and function to teeth with cavitated lesions. However, there will still exist a continuous need to repair or restore
time-dependent failure or degradation of restorations and a need
for the treatment of noncarious-related issues. As a result, deciding
which materials to use for a given clinical condition or situation
will depend on the known benefits of each treatment choice compared with the known risks.
Because a cure for caries and the development of processes
for root or tooth regeneration are probably several decades away,
most of the restorative materials employed today will likely remain
in use for the foreseeable future. Materials like dental amalgam
(Chapter 8, Safety of Amalgam Restorations), for example, have
made reliable restorations for centuries. The use of amalgam has
been declining rapidly, not because there are more durable and
technique-insensitive restorative materials available in the market
but because of concerns regarding the impact of mercury release
into the environment. Furthermore, the world has moved into
an era of high esthetic demand at the expense of durability and
cost. In contrast to the treatment for dental caries, the demand for
esthetic enhancement will continue well into the future. Development and research for direct restorative biomaterials that are
less technique-sensitive, especially the existing esthetic resin-based
composite brands, still have great room for improvement. In addition, strategies that aim to increase the hardness, toughness and
resistance to wear, and impact of these materials is relevant to the
field. An interesting approach relies on creating composites with
tailored microstructures, or bio-inspired platelet-reinforced composites created by magnetic manipulation of alumina platelets.
The benefits of caries prevention have led to a reduction in the
need for complete and removable dentures. Minimally invasive
concepts have led to the sealing of defective or leaking restorations with preventive resins rather than continuing to use more

CHAPTER 1

destructive replacement procedures. Thus, the development of
effective bio-inspired remineralizing agents for acid-damaged
enamel and dentin repair and the development of smart materials
that lead to self-repair of defective joints or of a material’s internal flaws, as well as dental pulp regeneration, will be critical challenges to the future of dental materials. In addition, the need for
replacement of restorations should decrease over the next several
decades, in lieu of the minimally invasive philosophy. However,
this reduction will be offset by the increased demand for esthetic
restorations (discussed in Chapter 20, Biomaterials).

CRITICAL QUESTION

Overview of Dental Materials

13

Therefore we can conclude that some restorative materials
became obsolete for the following reasons: (1) their drawbacks overall far outweighed their known advantages; (2) material degradation led to undesirable margin adaptation and esthetics; (3) metallic
appearance was generally unacceptable to patients; (4) alternative
restoratives exhibit superior performance, mimic the physiology of
the tooth, and are less technique-sensitive; (5) alternative materials
led to cheaper treatment for patients; and/or (6) improvements in
material microstructure occur as a result of technological advances.
In short, restorative materials become obsolete when an alternative
material is able to provide a better balance among all the previously
mentioned diverse requirements and expectations.

Which factors determine when dental material products become obsolete?

Organization of the Book

Technology has advanced tremendously over the past 40 years,
resulting in innovations such as laser applications, imaging procedures, three-dimensional (3-D) printing technology, lowshrinkage composites, smart ceramics, and minimally invasive
dental procedures, which have generated benefits for several
fields. Computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing
(CAD-CAM) technology for making indirect restorations, for
example, has reduced the demand for both impression materials and some indirect auxiliary materials that were used by laboratory technicians to fabricate indirect prostheses (discussed in
Chapter 15, Digital Impressions and Prototyping Tools).
Subsequently, one question has accompanied the dental profession for centuries: When does a restorative material become obsolete? For example, silicate cement (Chapter 7, History of Dental
Cements) was used to restore anterior esthetic restorations because
the color perception resembled tooth structure, and there was a serendipitous ability to release fluoride. Although the latter is beneficial
in preventing recurrent caries, fluoride release occurs at the expense
of surface degradation, discoloration, and marginal breakdown over
time, resulting in defective and stained margins (Figure 1-17) and
loss of anatomical contour. Furthermore, more durable resin-based
composites and improved micromechanical bonding procedures
made silicate cements virtually obsolete by the mid-1970s.

In 1936, Dr. Skinner, the author of the first edition of this book,
expressed significant concerns regarding the need for knowledge
of dental materials science in the following statement:

• Figure 1-17 Anterior class III silicate cement restorations exhibiting
severe surface degradation, marginal staining, and general discoloration.

Unfortunately, there are too many unscrupulous dental manufacturers who make impossible claims for inferior products, thus
deceiving the dentist. There have been actual cases of highly
advertised dental materials, which have been made extremely popular among dentists simply by clever advertising methods, whereas
careful laboratory tests have shown products to be distinctly inferior.
The well-informed dentist will be able to discriminate between fact
and propaganda and will refuse to be duped in this manner.
He emphasized the need for the principles of physics and chemistry to be applied in restorative dentistry in a similar manner as
they were applied to structural engineering. Although there have
been many technological advancements since 1936 that improved
the quality of dental materials, a challenge remains for end users to
critically evaluate the claims made for the performance of dental
materials and to carefully relate these claims to well-established
physical principles for specific classes of materials. The current era
of evidence-based dentistry is consistent with our aims of presenting fundamental principles of materials and understanding causeand-effect relationships that allow us to predict, with reasonable
certainty, the time-dependent behavior of dental materials.
To achieve these aims, this book is organized into five parts:
(I) General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials; (II) Direct
Restorative Materials; (III) Indirect Restorative and Prosthetic
Materials; (IV) Fabrication of Prostheses; and (V) Assessing Dental Restorations.
Following the overview of dental materials in this chapter, Part I
focuses on the structure and properties of materials. Chapter 2
explains how the molecular or crystalline structure determines the
classes of materials and renders each class its unique properties.
This chapter also discusses the origin of adhesion, an important
feature of dental restorations. Chapter 3 discusses the physical and
chemical properties relevant to dental applications, and Chapter 4
examines the mechanical properties of dental materials.
The chapters in Part II focus on direct restorative materials,
including resin-based composites (Chapter 5), bonding agents
(Chapter 6), dental cements (Chapter 7), and metallic-based restorations (Chapter 8). As stated earlier, these materials share the
same feature of being manipulated chairside and applied to the
oral cavity before they reach their full functional state. Therefore
preventive materials are discussed with direct restorative materials.
The chapters in Part III discuss the use of indirect restorative materials, such as dental casting alloys and wrought metals

14

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

(Chapter 9), ceramic-based materials (Chapter 10), denture-base
resins (Chapter 11), and dental implants (Chapter 12).
Chapter 13 through 16 in Part IV describe the materials and
technologies needed to fabricate indirect prostheses. Chapter 13
discusses auxiliary materials, which include impression materials, gypsum products, and dental waxes, which are used to fabricate the wax patterns needed for final prostheses. The process of
making metal castings using the lost wax method is discussed in
Chapter 14, and Chapter 15 discusses the use of digital technology
for making dental prostheses without using traditional auxiliary
materials but instead relying on digital imaging and CAD-CAM
technology. Finally, all restorations, direct or indirect, require certain degrees of surface modification to improve their clinical performance. The procedures and the essential instruments used for
finishing and polishing restorations are discussed in Chapter 16.
The goal of dentistry is to maintain or improve the quality of
life of the patient. The restorations involved must prevent disease,
relieve pain, improve the efficiency of mastication, enhance speech,
improve appearance, and most importantly, last for a long time.
Part V aims to address the question of how we assess restorations.
As stated, all materials undergo some sort of interaction with the

oral tissue. The biological considerations, known as biocompatibility, are covered in Chapter 17. In vitro testing is conducted by
subjecting a material made in a certain configuration to a known
external factor (or factors) in a well-defined condition and recording the material’s response to such factors. The significance of in
vitro testing is discussed in Chapter 18. Clinical evaluations of
a dental restoration represent a different level of assessment for
restorations. Chapter 19 discusses the components of clinical studies, using one to illustrate how variables can be collected from the
study. Finally, although new materials that address the particular
needs of restorative dentistry are emerging and alternative treatment philosophies are being adopted, the advancement of new
technologies in other disciplines has benefited dental materials
science in a variety of ways. Chapter 20 analyzes potential future
technologies in dentistry and describes both recently emerged
technologies and those anticipated in the coming decades.

Selected Readings

Munksgaard EC: Toxicology versus allergy in restorative dentistry, Adv
Dent Res 6:17–21, 1992.
Nanci A: Ten Cate’s Oral Histology: Development, Structure, and Function,
9th ed, St. Louis, 2018, Elsevier.
Stock SR, Vieira AE, Delbem AC, et al: Synchrotron micro computed
tomography of the mature bovine dentinoenamel junction, J Struct
Biol 161:162–171, 2008.
Thompson VP, Watson TF, Marshall GW Jr, et al: Outside-the-(cavityprep)-box thinking, Adv Dent Res 25:24–32, 2013.
Volponi1 AA, Zaugg LK, Neves V, et al: Tooth repair and regeneration,
Curr Oral Health Rep 5:295–303, 2018.

Borcic J, Anic I, Urek MM, et al: The prevalence of non-carious cervical
lesions in permanent dentition, J Oral Rehabil 31:117–123, 2004.
Erb RM, Libanori R, Rothfuchs N, et al: Composites reinforced in three
dimensions by using low magnetic fields, Science 335:199–204, 2012.
He LH, Swain MV: Understanding the mechanical behaviour of human
enamel from its structural and compositional characteristics, J Mech
Behav Biomed Mater 1:18–29, 2008.
Hensten-Pettersen A, Jacobsen N: Perceived side effects of biomaterials in
prosthetic dentistry, J Prosthet Dent 65:138–144, 1991.
Jäger I, Fratzl P: Mineralized collagen fibrils: A mechanical model with a staggered arrangement of mineral particles, Biophys J 79:1737–1746, 2000.
Lobbezoo F, Ahlberg J, Raphael KG, et al: International consensus on the
assessment of bruxism: Report of a work in progress, J Oral Rehabil
45:837–844, 2018.

Acknowledgment
The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. Kenneth J. Anusavice for his
contribution to the earlier editions of this chapter.

Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
ADA Standards Committee on Dental Products (ADA SCDP) ADA
website: https://www.ada.org/en/science-research/dental-standards/dental
-products.
This website provides details on ANSI/ADA specifications for dental
materials, instruments, and equipment and the working groups of the
ADA Standards Committee on Dental Products.
Borcic J, Anic I, Urek MM, et al: The prevalence of non-carious cervical
lesions in permanent dentition, J Oral Rehabil 31:117–123, 2004.
Coleman RL: Physical Properties of Dental Materials (Gold alloys and accessory
materials), Research Paper No. 32, Washington, DC, 1928, US Government Printing Office.
Cramer NB, Stansbury JW, Bowman CN: Recent advances and developments in composite dental restorative materials, J Dent Res 90:402–416,
2011.
This publication represents the first major effort to relate the physical
properties of dental materials to the clinical situation. The American
Dental Association specification program was established based on this
historical review of the philosophy and the content of the facility created
at the National Bureau of Standards (now National Institute of Standards and Technology).
Erb RM, Libanori R, Rothfuchs N, et al: Composites reinforced in three
dimensions by using low magnetic fields, Science 335:199–204,
2012.
Gibbs CH, Anusavice KJ, Young HM, et al: Maximum clenching force of
patients with moderate loss of posterior tooth support: A pilot study,
J Prosthet Dent 88:498–502, 2002.
The ability to sustain a maximum clenching force for a period of 2 s was
reported in this study.

He LH, Swain MV: Understanding the mechanical behaviour of human
enamel from its structural and compositional characteristics, J Mech
Behav Biomed Mater 1:18–29, 2008.
Hensten-Pettersen A, Jacobsen N: Perceived side effects of biomaterials
in prosthetic dentistry, J Prosthet Dent 65:138–144, 1991.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) website: https://www.
iso.org/home.html.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) TC 106—Dentistry
website. https://www.iso.org/committee/51218.html.
Jäger I, Fratzl P: Mineralized collagen fibrils: A mechanical model with a
staggered arrangement of mineral particles, Biophys J 79:1737–1746,
2000.
Kallus T, Mjör IA: Incidence of adverse effects of dental materials, Eur J Oral
Sci 99:236–240, 1991.
Lobbezoo F, Ahlberg J, Raphael KG, et al: International consensus on
the assessment of bruxism: Report of a work in progress, J Oral
Rehabil 45:837–844, 2018.
Munksgaard EC: Toxicology versus allergy in restorative dentistry, Adv Dent
Res 6:17–21, 1992.
Nanci A: Ten Cate’s oral histology: development, structure, and function, 9th ed,
St. Louis, 2018, Elsevier.
Phillips RW: Changing trends of dental restorative materials, Dent Clin
North Am 33:285–291, 1989.
Stock SR, Vieira AE, Delbem AC, et al: Synchrotron micro computed
tomography of the mature bovine dentinoenamel junction, J Struct
Biol 161:162–171, 2008.
Thompson VP, Watson TF, Marshall GW Jr, et al: Outside-the-(cavityprep)-box thinking, Adv Dent Res 25:24–32, 2013.
Volponi1 AA, Zaugg LK, Neves V, et al: Tooth repair and regeneration,
Curr Oral Health Rep 5:295–303, 2018.

14.e1

