11

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins
OUTLINE
Acrylic Resins

Physical Properties of Denture Base Resins

General Technique of Denture Base Fabrication

Biological Properties of Denture Base Resins

Heat-Activated Denture Base Resins

Additional Procedures Associated With Dentures

CAD-CAM Procedures in Denture Base Fabrication

Resin Teeth for Prosthetic Applications

Chemical-Activated Denture Base Resins

Materials for Maxillofacial Prosthetics

Light-Activated Denture Base Resins

KEY TERMS
Denture liner The polymeric material used to replace the tissuecontacting (intaglio) surface of an existing denture. A denture
liner may be hard or soft, short or long term.
Long-term resilient soft liner A resilient polymeric material that
is bonded to the tissue-contacting surface of a denture for
cushioning and/or improved retention. Such liners typically are
heat-processed, and thus, they are more durable than chemicalactivated, short-term soft liners and tissue conditioners.
Rebasing The process of replacing the entire denture base of an
existing complete or partial denture.
Relining The process of replacing the tissue-contacting surface of
an existing denture.
Resilient soft denture liner A polymeric material that is placed
on the tissue-contacting surface of a denture base to absorb

some of the mastication impact energy by acting as a type of
“shock absorber” between the occlusal surfaces of a denture
and the underlying oral tissues. A denture soft liner may also
be used to engage natural or prosthetic undercuts so as to
provide retention, stability, and support. These materials
may be placed chairside (directly) or in the dental laboratory
(indirectly).
Short-term soft liner (tissue conditioner) A resilient polymeric
material that is employed for brief periods (up to 14 days) to absorb masticatory impact and adapt to changing ridge contours
(e.g., following the extraction of teeth or surgical alteration of
an edentulous or partially edentulous ridge). Such materials
are typically chemical-activated polymers and tend to degrade
more rapidly than heat-activated resins.

The Glossary of Prosthodontic Terms, 9th edition, defines a complete denture as a removable dental prosthesis that replaces
the entire dentition and associated structures of the maxilla
or mandible. Such a prosthesis is composed of artificial teeth
attached to a denture base. In turn, the denture base derives its
support through contact with the oral tissues, teeth, or dental
implants.
Although individual denture bases can be formed from metals or ceramics, the majority of denture bases are fabricated using
common polymers. Such polymers are chosen based on availability, dimensional stability, handling characteristics, color, and compatibility with oral tissues.
A description of commonly used denture base polymers is
presented in this chapter. Considerable attention is given to individual processing systems and polymerization techniques. In addition, methods for improving the fit and dimensional stability of
resin-based prostheses are provided.

Acrylic Resins
Since the mid-1940s, the majority of denture bases have been
fabricated using poly(methyl methacrylate) resins, also known as
PMMA. PMMA is a colorless transparent solid that can be tinted
with pigments, dyes, fillers, and fibers to provide almost any color,
shade, and degree of translucency. The color, optical characteristics, and dimensional properties of PMMA remain stable under
normal intraoral conditions, and its physical properties have
proven to be adequate for dental applications.
One decided advantage of PMMA is the relative ease with which
this material can be processed. PMMA denture base material is
commonly supplied as a powder–liquid system (Figure 11-1). The
liquid contains mostly methyl methacrylate monomers, di- or trimethacrylate crosslinking agents (Figure 11-2), and an inhibitor,
and the powder contains predominantly PMMA resin in the form
of micro-sized beads (or spheres). When the liquid and powder

233

234

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

are mixed in the proper proportions, a workable mass is formed.
The material is introduced into a properly formed mold cavity
and polymerized under heat and pressure. Recall from Chapter 2,
Chemistry of Polymerization, that polymerization can be activated by chemical, heat, and light energy. Microwave energy may
also be used for polymerization. In addition, computer-aided

design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD-CAM) technologies of milling PMMA pucks and three-dimensional (3-D) printing using methacrylate-based monomers (Chapter 15, Additive
Manufacturing—3D printing) are also available.

General Technique of Denture Base
Fabrication

• Figure 11-1 A representative heat-activated resin. The majority of heatactivated resins are supplied as powder–liquid systems. (Courtesy Lang
Dental Mfg. Co., Inc., Wheeling, IL.)

Methyl
methacrylate

Glycol
dimethacrylate

Several processing techniques are available for the fabrication of
denture bases (Figures 11-3 to 11-11). Each technique requires
a suitable impression of the associated dental arch, followed by
the fabrication of an accurate gypsum cast. In turn, a resin record
base is fabricated on the cast. Wax is added to the record base, and
prosthetic teeth are positioned in the wax (Figure 11-3, A). The
prosthetic teeth are related to the opposing dentition and evaluated in the patient’s mouth before proceeding.
In the laboratory, a bronze denture flask is used, and the
completed tooth arrangement is encased in a suitable investing
medium (usually gypsum). A plastic denture flask is mandatory
if microwave energy is used. Subsequently, the denture flask is
opened, and the wax denture base is eliminated in a hot-water
bath, leaving the prosthetic teeth in place. After a thorough cleansing of the mold, an appropriate separator is applied to the gypsum surface. In turn, a resin denture base material is introduced
into the mold cavity and polymerized under pressure. Following
polymerization, the denture is recovered and prepared for clinical
placement.
Not all denture base processing requires flasks. When light-activated resin or CAD-CAM processing is used, no flask is needed.
In this chapter, we will discuss commonly available denture base
materials and the properties and additional applications of denture base resins.

Crosslinked poly(methyl methacrylate)

Activator
Initiator

• Figure 11-2 Chemical basis for the formation of crosslinked poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). Glycol
dimethacrylate is incorporated into PMMA chains and may “bridge” or “interconnect” such chains.

CHAPTER 11

A

B

C

D

E

F

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

235

• Figure 11-3 Steps in mold preparation (compression molding technique). A, Completed tooth arrangement prepared for flasking process. B, Master cast embedded in properly contoured dental gypsum.
C, Occlusal and incisal surfaces of the prosthetic teeth are exposed to facilitate subsequent denture recovery. D, Fully flasked complete maxillary denture. E, Separation of flask segments during wax-elimination
process. F, Placement of alginate-based separating medium.

Heat-Activated Denture Base Resins
Heat-activated materials are used in the fabrication of nearly all
denture bases. The use of heat-activated polymers involves the
preparation of a gypsum mold for compression molding, preparation of denture base resin, and a thermal polymerization using a
water bath or microwave oven.

Compression Molding Technique
As a rule, heat-activated denture base resins are shaped via compression molding. Therefore the compression molding technique
is described in detail in the following subsections.

Preparation of the Mold
Before mold preparation, prosthetic teeth must be selected and
arranged in a manner that will fulfill both esthetic and functional
requirements. In turn, the completed tooth arrangement is sealed
to the master gypsum cast.
At this stage, the master cast and completed tooth arrangement are removed from the dental articulator (Figure 11-3, A).
The master cast is coated with a thin layer of separator to prevent
adherence of dental gypsum to the master cast during the flasking process. The lower half of a denture flask is filled with freshly
mixed gypsum, and the master cast is placed into this mixture.
The gypsum is contoured to facilitate wax elimination, packing,
and deflasking procedures (Figure 11-3, B). Upon reaching the
initial set, the gypsum surfaces are coated with an appropriate
separator.
The upper half of the selected denture flask is then positioned
atop the lower half of the flask. A surface-tension–reducing agent
is applied to exposed wax surfaces, and a second mix of dental
gypsum is prepared. This increment of gypsum is poured into
the denture flask. Care must be taken to ensure that the investing

material achieves intimate contact with all external surfaces of the
mounted teeth. The investing gypsum is added until all surfaces of
the tooth arrangement and denture base are completely covered.
Incisal and occlusal surfaces are minimally exposed to facilitate
subsequent deflasking (Figure 11-3, C). The gypsum is then permitted to set and is coated with a colorless separator.
At this point, an additional increment of gypsum is mixed, and
the remainder of the flask is filled. The lid of the flask is gently
seated, and the gypsum is allowed to harden (Figure 11-3, D).
After the gypsum has hardened, the record base and wax must
be removed from the mold. To accomplish this task, the denture
flask is immersed in boiling water for 4 minutes. The flask is
then removed from the water, and the appropriate segments are
separated. The record base and softened wax remain in the lower
half of the denture flask, while the prosthetic teeth remain firmly
embedded in the investing gypsum of the remaining segment
(Figure 11-3, E). The record base and softened wax are carefully
removed from the surface of the mold. Residual wax is removed
from the mold cavity using wax solvent. The mold cavity is subsequently cleaned with a mild detergent solution and rinsed with
boiling water.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What is the purpose of a separating medium that is used during denture base
fabrication? What is the chemical basis for popular separating media?

Selection and Application of a Separating Medium
The next step in denture base fabrication involves the application of an appropriate separating medium onto the surfaces of
the mold cavity. This medium prevents direct contact between
the denture base resin and the mold surface. Failure to place an
appropriate separating medium can lead to two major difficulties:
(1) If water is permitted to diffuse into the denture base resin, the

236

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

moisture can affect the polymerization rate and the optical and
physical properties of the resultant denture base. (2) If dissolved
polymer or free monomer soaks into the mold surface, portions of
the investing medium can fuse to the denture base, affecting the
physical and esthetic properties of processed denture bases.
Currently, the most popular separating agents are water-soluble
colloidal alginate solutions. When applied to gypsum surfaces, these
solutions produce thin, relatively insoluble calcium alginate films.
These films prevent direct contact of denture base resins and the surrounding dental gypsum.
A small amount of separator is dispensed into a disposable
container. Then, a fine brush is used to apply the separating
medium onto the exposed surfaces of a warm, clean gypsum mold
(Figure 11-3, F). Separator should not contact the exposed portions of acrylic resin teeth because the separator interferes with
chemical bonding between acrylic resin teeth and denture base
resins. Subsequently, the mold sections are oriented to prevent
“pooling” of separator and permitted to dry.

results in shrinkage. Research indicates that the polymerization
of methyl methacrylate monomers to form PMMA yields a 21%
decrease in the volume of material. To minimize dimensional
changes, resin manufacturers incorporate a significant fraction of
polymer beads, like the fillers added in resin-based composites.
When the powder and liquid components are mixed in the
proper proportions, a doughlike mass results. Commercial products generally exhibit a polymer-to-monomer ratio of approximately 3:1 by volume. This ratio provides sufficient monomer to
thoroughly wet the polymer beads but does not contribute excess
monomer that would produce increased polymerization shrinkage. Using a 3:1 ratio, the volumetric shrinkage can be limited to
approximately 7% (about 2.3% linear shrinkage). Polymerization
shrinkage is compensated by the initial setting expansion of the
gypsum mold and swelling of the polymerized acrylic resin upon
exposure to water in the denture flask and in clinical service. Consequently, the completed prosthesis displays little dimensional
change.

Preparation of Heat-Activated Denture Resin

CRITICAL QUESTIONS

As previously noted, most PMMA resin systems include powder
and liquid components (Figure 11-1). The powder consists of
spheres of PMMA, other copolymer, and a small amount of benzoyl peroxide, termed the initiator. Upon heating, the benzoyl peroxide generates free radicals, which are responsible for initiating
polymerization. The liquid is predominantly methyl methacrylate
monomer with small amounts of hydroquinone, as an inhibitor
to prevent untimely polymerization of the liquid during storage. Inhibitors also retard the curing process and thereby increase
working time.
Crosslinking agents, such as glycol dimethacrylate, may be
added to the liquid. Glycol dimethacrylate is chemically and structurally similar to methyl methacrylate and can be incorporated
into growing methyl methacrylate polymer chains (Figure 11-2).
It is important to note that methyl methacrylate possesses one carbon-carbon double bond per molecule, and glycol dimethacrylate
possesses two double bonds per molecule. As a result, an individual molecule of glycol dimethacrylate may serve as a “bridge” or
“cross-member” linking two growing polymer chains. If sufficient
glycol dimethacrylate is included in the mixture, numerous interconnections may be formed. These interconnections yield a netlike structure that provides resistance to deformation and solvent
swelling that may be caused by exposure to ethanol in the diet.
Crosslinking agents are incorporated into the liquid component
at a concentration of 1% to 2% by volume.

What are the five physical stages through which properly mixed denture base
resins pass? During which stage should compression molding be initiated?

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Why do denture base resin systems contain polymer beads? How does the
inclusion of polymer beads affect volumetric shrinkage?

Polymer-to-Monomer Ratio
A proper polymer-to-monomer ratio is important in the fabrication of well-fitting denture bases with desirable physical properties. Unfortunately, most discussions of the polymer-to-monomer
ratio provide little practical information for dental personnel.
Furthermore, these discussions do not address the relationships
between molecular events and the gross handling characteristics
of denture base resins.
As discussed in Chapter 5, Composition and Function, on
resin-based composites, the polymerization of denture base resins

Polymer-Monomer Interaction
When monomer and polymer are mixed in the proper proportions, a workable mass is produced. Upon standing, without subjecting to heat for initiation of polymerization, the resultant mass
passes through five distinct stages. These stages can be described
as (1) sandy, (2) stringy, (3) doughlike, (4) rubbery or elastic, and
(5) stiff.
During the sandy stage, little or no interaction occurs on a molecular level. Polymer beads remain unaltered, and the consistency of
the mixture can be described as “coarse” or “grainy.” Later, the mixture enters a stringy stage when the monomer attacks the surfaces
of individual polymer beads and is absorbed into the beads, causing
swelling of the beads and dissolution of these non-crosslinked polymer chains into the liquid monomer. These polymer chains uncoil,
thereby increasing the viscosity of the mix. This stage is characterized by “stringiness” or “stickiness” when the material is touched or
drawn apart.
Subsequently, the mass enters a doughlike stage. On a molecular level, an increased number of polymer chains enter the solution. The mixture may be envisioned as polymeric strands within a
volume of liquid monomer. (Visualize strands of cooked spaghetti
in a pot containing water.) Clinically, the mass behaves as a pliable
dough. It is no longer tacky and does not adhere to the surfaces
of the mixing vessel or spatula. This is the ideal consistency for
compression molding. As a result, the material should be introduced into the mold cavity during the latter phases of the doughlike stage.
Following the doughlike stage, the mixture enters a rubbery
or elastic stage. This is because some monomer is dissipated by
evaporation, and some penetrates further into remaining polymer
beads. The mass rebounds when compressed or stretched. Because
the mass no longer flows freely to assume the shape of its container, the rubbery acrylic is not moldable by conventional compression techniques.
Upon standing for an extended period, the mixture becomes
stiff. This is the result of the evaporation of unreacted monomer.
From a clinical standpoint, the mixture appears dry and is resistant to mechanical deformation.

CHAPTER 11

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

237

• Figure 11-4 Steps in resin packing (compression-molding technique). A, Properly mixed resin is bent
into a horseshoe shape and placed into the mold cavity. B, The flask assembly is placed into a flask press,
and pressure is applied. C, Excess material is carefully removed from the flask. D, The flask is transferred
to a flask carrier, which maintains pressure on the assembly during processing.

Dough-Forming Time
The time required for the resin mixture to reach a doughlike stage
is termed the dough-forming time. American National Standards
Institute/American Dental Association (ANSI/ADA) Standard
No. 139—Dental Base polymers: 2020 (ISO 20795-1:2013
Dentistry—Base polymers—Part 1: Denture base polymers)
requires that this consistency be attained in less than 40 minutes
from the start of the mixing process. In clinical use, the majority
of denture base products reach a doughlike consistency in less
than 10 minutes.
Working Time
Working time is defined as the time a denture base material remains
in the doughlike stage. This period is critical to the compression
molding process. ANSI/ADA Standard No. 139 requires the
dough to remain moldable for at least 5 minutes.
Ambient temperature affects the working time. Hence the
working time of a denture resin can be extended via refrigeration.
A significant drawback associated with this technique is that moisture may condense on the resin when it is exposed to ambient air.
The presence of moisture may degrade the physical and esthetic
properties of a processed resin. Moisture contamination can be
avoided by storing the resin in an airtight container. Following
removal from the refrigerator, the container should not be opened
until it reaches room temperature.

Packing
The introduction of denture base resin into the mold cavity
is termed packing. This process represents critical steps in denture base fabrication. While in a doughlike state, the resin is
removed from its mixing container and rolled into a cylindrical
form. Monomer is painted over the necks of the denture teeth
to promote bonding to the denture base. Subsequently, the resin
form is bent into a horseshoe shape and placed into the portion of
the flask that houses the prosthetic teeth (Figure 11-4, A). A thin
polyethylene packing sheet is placed over the master cast, and the
flask is reassembled.
The flask assembly is placed into a press, and pressure is applied
incrementally (Figure 11-4, B). Slow application of pressure permits the resin dough to flow uniformly throughout the mold
space. The application of pressure is continued until the denture
flask is fully closed. In turn, the flask is opened, and the polyethylene packing sheet is removed from the surface of the resin with
a rapid, sustained tug.
Excess resin will be found on the relatively flat areas surrounding the mold cavity. This excess resin is called flash. Using
a rounded instrument, the flash is carefully teased away from the
body of resin that occupies the mold cavity (Figure 11-4, C). Care
is taken not to chip the gypsum surfaces of the mold. Pieces of
gypsum that have become dislodged must be removed so that they
are not incorporated into the processed denture base.

238

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

placed into a water bath for polymerization of the denture base
resin if a heat-curing resin is used. Upon completion, the denture
is recovered, adjusted, finished, and polished.
Currently, there is some debate regarding the comparative
accuracy of denture bases fabricated by compression molding and
those fabricated by injection molding. Available data and clinical information indicate that denture bases fabricated by injection
molding can provide slightly improved clinical accuracy.

Polymerization Procedure
During denture base fabrication, heat is applied to the resin by
immersing the denture flask and flask carrier in a water bath. The
water is heated to a prescribed temperature and maintained at that
temperature for a period suggested by the manufacturer.

Temperature Rise
The polymerization of denture base resins is exothermic, and the
amount of heat evolved can affect the properties of processed denture bases. Representative temperature changes occurring in water,
investing gypsum, and resin are presented in Figure 11-7. The temperature profile of the investing gypsum closely parallels the heating curve for the water. The temperature of the denture base resin
lags somewhat during the initial stages of the heating process. This
is caused by the fact that the resin occupies a position in the center
of the mold, and therefore, heat penetration takes longer.
As the denture base resin rises slightly above 70 °C, the temperature of the resin begins to increase rapidly. In turn, the
decomposition rate of benzoyl peroxide is significantly increased.
This sequence of events leads to an increased rate of polymerization
and an accompanying increase in the exothermic heat of reaction.
• Figure 11-5 A cross-sectional representation of the denture flask and

CRITICAL QUESTIONS

its contents.

What causes porosity in denture bases? How can these defects be minimized?

A fresh polyethylene packing sheet is placed between the major
portions of the flask, and the flask assembly is once again placed in
the press. Trial closures are repeated until minimal flash is observed.
At this stage, the mold is closed for the last time with no packing sheet interposed. The mold sections are aligned and placed
in the flask press. Again, pressure is incrementally applied. Following definitive closure, the flask is transferred to a flask carrier
(Figure 11-4, D), which maintains pressure on the flask assembly
during denture base processing. A cross-sectional representation
of the denture flask assembly is presented in Figure 11-5.

Polymerization Cycle
Controlled heating processes are used to guide the polymerization
of heat-activated denture bases. Such heating processes are termed
polymerization cycles or curing cycles. The relationship between the
heating rate and temperature rise within the denture base resin is
illustrated in Figure 11-8. The polymerization cycle represented
by curve C probably would yield porosity in thick portions of the
denture because the temperature of the resin exceeds the boiling
point of the monomer (100.8 °C). On the other hand, the polymerization cycle represented by curve A probably would result in the
presence of residual monomer because the resin temperature does
not reach the boiling temperature of the monomer. To minimize
the likelihood of undesirable outcomes, carefully controlled heating cycles have been developed.
One technique involves processing the denture base resin in a
constant-temperature water bath at 74 °C (165 °F) for 8 hours or
longer, with no terminal boiling treatment. A second technique
consists of processing in a 74 °C water bath for 8 hours, and then
increasing the temperature to 100 °C for 1 hour. A third technique
involves processing the resin at 74 °C for approximately 2 hours and
increasing the temperature of the water bath to 100 °C and processing for 1 hour. All techniques are commonly used and equally
effective.
Following completion of the chosen polymerization cycle, the
denture flask should be permitted to cool to room temperature.
Rapid cooling can result in distortion of the denture base because

Injection Molding Technique
In addition to the compression molding techniques, denture bases
can be fabricated via injection molding using specially designed
flasks. One half of the flask is filled with freshly mixed gypsum, and
the master cast is settled into this mixture. The gypsum is appropriately contoured and permitted to set. Subsequently, sprues or
ingates are attached to the wax denture base to introduce resin during the injection-molding process (Figure 11-6, A). The remaining half of the flask is positioned, and the investment process is
completed (Figure 11-6, B). Wax elimination is performed as previously described (Figure 11-6, C), and the flask is reassembled.
Subsequently, the flask is placed into a carrier that maintains pressure on the assembly during resin introduction and processing.
Upon completion of the foregoing steps, resin is mixed and
injected into the mold cavity (Figure 11-6, D). The flask is then

CHAPTER 11

A

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

239

B

D

C

• Figure 11-6 Steps in mold preparation (injection molding technique). A, Placement of sprues for introduction of resin. B, Occlusal and incisal surfaces of the prosthetic teeth are exposed to facilitate denture
recovery. C, Separation of flask segments during wax-elimination process. D, Injection of resin and placement of assembly into water bath.

of differences in the thermal contraction of resin and investing gypsum. To minimize potential difficulties, the flask should be removed
from the water and bench-cooled for 30 minutes. Subsequently, the
flask should be immersed in cool tap water for 15 minutes. The denture base may then be deflasked and prepared for delivery. To decrease
the probability of unfavorable dimensional changes, the denture
should be stored in water until the clinical fitting appointment.

Polymerization via Microwave Energy
PMMA resin may be polymerized using microwave energy because
the methyl methacrylate molecule is asymmetrical and therefore
“lossy.” This technique employs a specially formulated resin and
a nonmetallic flask (Figure 11-9). A conventional 1100-watt,
24-GHz microwave oven is used to supply the thermal energy
required for polymerization.
The major advantage of this technique is the speed with which
polymerization may be accomplished. Despite the decreased processing time, overheating can occur in thick sections, causing the
monomer to boil and yielding porosity. It should also be noted
that although the polymerization time is reduced, the required
technician time is unaffected. Available information indicates
that the physical properties of microwave resins are comparable
to those of conventional resins. Furthermore, the fit of denture
bases polymerized using microwave energy is comparable to those
processed via conventional compression molding techniques.

CAD-CAM Procedures in Denture Base
Fabrication
Although the first CAM software program was developed by
Dr. Patrick Hanratty in the 1950s, it was not until the 1990s
that CAD-CAM technologies were used to generate complete
dentures. The first English-language account of computeraided technology in the fabrication of complete dentures was
published by Maeda et al. in 1994. The authors employed stereolithography to generate complete dentures in a proof-ofconcept effort. Beginning in 1995, Goodacre employed a series
of procedures intended to facilitate the fabrication of complete
dentures using subtractive techniques. In the ensuing years,
Kawahata et al. and Kanazawa et al. used computer numerical
control (CNC) milling to advance and refine previous efforts.
CNC is an automated control of machining and 3-D printers
by means of a computer. In 2012, Goodacre et al. published
the first clinical account of CAD-CAM dentures milled from
prepolymerized PMMA.
Advantages associated with CAD-CAM fabrication of complete dentures include enhanced material properties and improved
dimensional stability of the resultant prostheses. PMMA “pucks”
are fabricated at increased pressures and under strictly controlled
thermal conditions. Consequently, these materials display decreased
porosity, increased polymerization, and a diminished residual

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

monomer content. Moreover, the prepolymerized resins used in
current subtractive processes are approximately 8% more dense
than their conventionally processed counterparts. These factors are
likely to yield enhanced clinical performance and decreased surface
colonization by undesirable species such as Candida albicans.
Machining of prepolymerized PMMA specimens also affects the
clinical adaptation and the dimensional stability of completed denture bases. As previously noted, dentures fabricated via compression-molding techniques are subject to polymerization shrinkage
during the fabrication process. In addition, compression-molded

140

Acrylic

100

120

80

C
B

100

Water

Temperature (°C)

Temperature (°C)

120

prostheses are susceptible to distortion upon recovery from the
mold. Corresponding changes are not observed in machined specimens because polymerization shrinkage and stress relaxation occur
before the machining process. As a result, milled denture bases
exhibit improved adaptation to the underlying ridges upon clinical
placement and are less susceptible to distortion because relaxation
has occurred prior to the machining process.
Currently, the most common CAD-CAM techniques for the
fabrication of complete dentures employ milling technologies.
Clinicians are responsible for accurately capturing the anatomical ridge forms, identifying critical landmarks (e.g., incisal edge
position, facial midline, lip line, etc.), recording desired ridge/
arch relationships, and determining appropriate tooth shades and
forms. This information is transferred to the dental laboratory
or manufacturer responsible for prosthesis fabrication. Design is
accomplished in a virtual environment (CAD) and subsequently
exported to a milling device for production (CAM).

60
Investing gypsum (plaster)
40

A

Wa
ter

240

80

ter
Wa

60

40

20

20
0

20

40

60

80

0

100

ing plaster, and acrylic resin during the polymerization of a 25.4-mm cube
of denture resin. (Modified from Tuckfield WJ, Worner HK, Guerin BD:
Acrylic resins in dentistry. Aust Dent J, 47:119–121, 1943. Reproduced
with permission from the Australian Dental Journal.)

A

40

60

80

100

120

3 hrs.

Heating time (min)

Time of heating (min)

• Figure 11-7 Temperature–time heating curves for the water bath, invest-

20

• Figure 11-8 Temperature changes in acrylic resin when subjected to
various curing schedules. Curve A temperature rose to 100 °C in 3 hours,
curve B temperature rose to 100 °C in 40 minutes, and curve C began at
100 °C. (Modified from Tuckfield WJ, Worner HK, Guerin BD: Acrylic resins
in dentistry. Aust Dent J, 47:119–121, 1943. Reproduced with permission
from the Australian Dental Journal.)

B
• Figure 11-9 A representative microwave-activated resin system. A, Nonmetallic flask. B, Powder and
liquid components of the resin. (Courtesy GC America, Inc., Alsip, IL.)

CHAPTER 11

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

241

In the existing environment, dominant systems employ twocomponent manufacturing processes. The required denture base
is manufactured as one component, and the corresponding teeth
are manufactured as a separate yet continuous monolithic component. The denture base and tooth forms may be joined in a variety
of ways, and the prosthesis is finished, polished, and prepared for
clinical placement.

polymerized via chemical activation generally display 3% to 5%
free monomer, whereas heat-activated resins exhibit 0.2% to 0.5%
free monomer. Therefore it is important that the polymerization
of chemical-activated resins be as complete as possible. Failure to
achieve a high degree of polymerization will predispose the denture
base to dimensional instability and can lead to tissue irritation.

Critical Question

Heat-Activated Versus Chemical-Activated
Denture Base

What are the benefits associated with the chemical-activated processes
compared with heat-activated processes?

Chemical-Activated Denture Base Resins
The same initiator used in heat-activated denture base resin can
also be activated by a tertiary amine, such as dimethyl-para-toluidine. The tertiary amine may be added to the liquid monomer.
Upon mixing liquid and powder components, the tertiary amine
causes decomposition of the benzoyl peroxide contained in the
powder. As a result, free radicals are produced, and polymerization
progresses in a manner similar to that described for heat-activated
systems. Chemical activation does not require the application of
thermal energy and can be completed at room temperature. For
this reason, chemical-activated resins often are referred to as coldcuring, self-curing, or autopolymerizing resins.

Technical Considerations
The powder and liquid components are mixed according to the
manufacturer’s directions and permitted to attain a doughlike
consistency. The working time for chemical-activated resins is
shorter than that for heat-activated materials. Therefore special
attention must be paid to the consistency of the material and rate
of polymerization.
A lengthy initiation period is desirable because this provides
adequate time for trial closures of the denture flask. One method
for prolonging the initiation period is to decrease the temperature
of the resin mass. This may be accomplished by refrigerating the
liquid component and/or the mixing vessel before the mixing process. When the powder and liquid are mixed, the polymerization
process is slowed, the resin mass remains in a doughy stage for an
extended period, and the working time is prolonged.
Mold preparation and resin packing are accomplished in the
same manner described for heat-activated resins. In cases of chemical-activated resins with minimal working times, it is doubtful
that more than two trial closures can be made. Therefore extreme
care must be taken to ensure that a proper amount of resin is
employed, and a minimal number of trial closures are needed.

Processing Considerations
Following definitive closure of the denture flask, pressure must
be maintained throughout the polymerization process. The time
required for polymerization will vary with the material chosen.
Initial hardening of the resin generally will occur within
30 minutes, but polymerization continues for an extended period.
To ensure sufficient polymerization, the flask should be held under
pressure for a minimum of 3 hours.
The polymerization of chemical-activated resins is never as
complete as the polymerization of heat-activated materials. Resins

The residual monomer in chemical-activated denture base materials creates two difficulties. First, the residual monomer acts
as a plasticizer, resulting in decreased transverse strength of the
denture resin. Second, the residual monomer serves as a potential
tissue irritant, thereby compromising the biocompatibility of the
denture base.
From a physical standpoint, chemical-activated resins display
slightly less shrinkage than their heat-activated counterparts.
This imparts greater dimensional accuracy to chemical-activated
resins.
The color stability of chemical-activated resins generally
is inferior to the color stability of heat-activated resins. This
property is related to the presence of tertiary amines within the
chemical-activated resins. Such amines are susceptible to oxidation and accompanying color changes that affect the appearance
of the resin. Discoloration of these resins can be minimized via
the addition of stabilizing agents that prevent such oxidation.

Fluid-Resin Technique
The fluid-resin technique employs a pourable, chemical-activated
resin for the fabrication of denture bases. When mixed in the
proper proportions, a low-viscosity resin is produced. This resin
is poured into a mold cavity, subjected to increased atmospheric
pressure, and allowed to polymerize at ambient temperature. Laboratory aspects of the fluid-resin technique are described in the
following paragraphs.
Tooth arrangement is accomplished using accepted prosthodontic principles. The completed tooth arrangement is then
sealed to the underlying master cast and placed in a specially
designed flask (Figure 11-10, A). The flask is filled with a reversible hydrocolloid-based investment medium, and the assembly is
cooled. Following gelation of the hydrocolloid, the master cast
with the attached tooth arrangement is removed from the flask
(Figure 11-10, B). At this stage, sprues and vents are cut from the
external surface of the flask to the mold cavity (Figure 11-10, C).
Wax is eliminated from the cast using water. The prosthetic
teeth are retrieved and carefully seated in their respective positions within the hydrocolloid investing medium. Subsequently,
the master cast is returned to its position within the mold
(Figure 11-10, D).
The resin is mixed according to the manufacturer’s directions
and poured into the mold via the sprue channels (Figure 11-10, E).
The flask is then placed in a pressurized chamber (i.e., a pressure
pot) at room temperature, and the resin is permitted to polymerize.
According to available information, only 30 to 45 min are required
for polymerization. Nevertheless, a longer period is recommended.
Following completion of the polymerization process, the denture is retrieved from the flask (Figure 11-10, F), and the sprues
are removed. The denture/cast assembly is returned to the dental
articulator for correction of processing changes. Subsequently, the

242

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

A

B

C

D

E

F

• Figure 11-10 Steps in mold preparation (fluid-resin technique). A, Completed tooth arrangement
positioned in a fluid-resin flask. B, Removal of tooth arrangement from reversible hydrocolloid investment.
C, Preparation of sprues and vents for the introduction of resin. D, Repositioning of the prosthetic teeth
and master cast. E, Introduction of pour-type resin. F, Recovery of the completed prosthesis.

denture base is finished and polished. At this stage, the denture
should be stored in water to prevent dehydration and distortion.
Advantages claimed for the fluid-resin technique include (1)
improved adaptation to underlying soft tissues; (2) decreased probability of damage to prosthetic teeth and denture bases during
deflasking; (3) reduced material costs; and (4) simplification of the
flasking, deflasking, and finishing procedures.
Potential disadvantages of the fluid-resin technique include (1)
noticeable shifting of prosthetic teeth during processing, (2) air
entrapment within the denture base material, (3) poor bonding
between the denture base material and acrylic resin teeth, and (4)
technique sensitivity.
In general, denture bases fabricated in this manner exhibit
physical properties that are somewhat inferior to those of conventional heat-processed resins. Nonetheless, clinically acceptable
dentures can be obtained using fluid resins.

Light-Activated Denture Base Resins
Light-activated denture base resins have been described as resinbased composites having matrices of urethane dimethacrylate
(UDMA; Figure 5-2), microfine silica, and high-molecular-weight
acrylic resin monomers. Acrylic resin beads are included as organic
fillers. Blue light is the activator, and a photosensitizing agent such
as camphorquinone serves as the initiator for polymerization. Single-component denture base resins are supplied in sheet and rope
forms and are packed in lightproof pouches to prevent inadvertent
polymerization (Figure 11-11, A). The most recent generation of
light-activated denture base resins consists of three distinct components: (1) a base-forming resin, (2) a tooth-setting resin, and (3)
a contouring resin.
A light-activated resin cannot be flasked in a conventional
manner because opaque investing media prevent the penetration
of light. Instead, a definitive prosthesis is sculpted on the master cast using the aforementioned resins (Figure 11-11, B). The

base-forming resin is first adapted to the master cast and cured
in a high-intensity light chamber (Figure 11-11, C). Subsequently,
the tooth-setting resin is used to attach the prosthetic teeth to the
polymerized base and placed in the light chamber to polymerize
the tooth-setting resin, thereby maintaining prosthetic teeth in the
desired positions. Next, a contouring resin is used to generate the
desired surface anatomy. The resultant prosthesis (Figure 11-11, B)
is placed into the light chamber to complete the process of denture
base fabrication. The denture is then removed from the cast, finished, and polished in a conventional manner.

Physical Properties of Denture Base Resins
The physical properties of denture base resins are critical to the
fit and function of removable dental prostheses. Characteristics
of interest include polymerization shrinkage, porosity, water
sorption, solubility, processing stresses, and crazing. These characteristics are addressed in the following sections.

Polymerization Shrinkage
When methyl methacrylate monomer is polymerized to form
PMMA, the density of the mass changes from 0.94 to 1.19 g/cm3.
This change in density results in a volumetric shrinkage of 21%.
When a conventional heat-activated resin is mixed at the suggested
powder-to-liquid ratio, about one third of the mass is liquid monomer. The remainder of the mass is PMMA beads. Consequently, the
volumetric shrinkage exhibited by the polymerized mass should be
approximately 7%. This figure agrees with values observed in laboratory and clinical investigations.

Critical Question
Why is the relatively high volumetric shrinkage of a denture base resin not
usually considered a significant clinical problem?

CHAPTER 11

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

243

A

B

C

• Figure 11-11 Steps in denture fabrication (light-activated denture base resins). A, Representative lightactivated denture base resin. Sheet and rope forms are supplied in light-proof pouches to prevent inadvertent polymerization. B, Teeth are arranged, and the denture base is sculpted using light-activated resin. C,
The denture base is placed into a light chamber and polymerized according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. (Parts A and C courtesy Densply International, York, PA.)

There are several possible reasons a material exhibiting high
volumetric shrinkage can be used to produce clinically satisfactory
denture bases. In addition to volumetric shrinkage, one also must
consider the effects of linear shrinkage. Linear shrinkage exerts significant effects upon denture base adaptation and cuspal interdigitation.
Based on a projected volumetric shrinkage of 7%, an acrylic resin
denture base should exhibit a linear shrinkage of 2.3 %, approximately {1/3} the value of the volumetric shrinkage. In reality, linear
shrinkage within a denture base rarely exceeds 1% (Table 11-1).
Examination of the polymerization process indicates that
thermal shrinkage of resin is primarily responsible for the linear
changes observed in heat-activated systems. During the initial
stages of the cooling process, the resin remains relatively soft. Consequently, the resin mass contracts at about the same rate as the
surrounding gypsum.

TABLE 11-1

Polymerization Shrinkage of Maxillary
Denture Bases

Material

Linear Shrinkage (%)

High-impact acrylic resin

0.12

Vinyl acrylic resin

0.33

Conventional acrylic resin

0.43

Pour-type acrylic resin

0.48

Rapid heat-cured acrylic resin

0.97

Data from Stafford GD, Bates JF, Huggett R, Handley RW: A review of the properties of
some denture base polymers. J Dent 8:292, 1960.

244

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

A

B

C

D
• Figure 11-12 Dimensional changes resulting from polymerization. A, Chemical-activated resin, pour
technique. B, Microwave resin, compression molding. C, Conventional heat-activated resin, compression
molding. D, Heat-activated resin, injection molding. (Demonstration and photographs courtesy Dr. Rodney
Phoenix.)

As cooling proceeds, the soft resin approaches its glasstransition temperature, Tg, which is the thermal range in which
the polymerized resin passes from a soft, rubbery state to a rigid,
glassy state. Cooling the denture base resin beyond the glasstransition temperature yields a rigid mass. As might be expected,
this rigid mass contracts at a rate different from that of surrounding dental gypsum. The shrinkage occurring below the glass-transition temperature is thermal in nature and varies according to the
composition of the resin.
To illustrate the effect of thermal shrinkage, consider the following example. The glass-transition temperature for PMMA is
approximately 105 °C. Room temperature is 20 °C. The generally
accepted value for the linear coefficient of thermal expansion, α,
for PMMA is 81 ppm/°C. Therefore, as the denture base resin
cools from the glass-transition temperature to room temperature,
the resin undergoes a linear shrinkage, which can be expressed as
follows:
Linear shrinkage  T  (81  106 )(105  20)  0.69%
This value agrees with the linear shrinkages of 0.12% to
0.97% reported for various commercial denture base resins (see
Table 11-1).
Complete dentures constructed using chemical-activated resins generally display better adaptation than those constructed
using heat-activated resins. This phenomenon can be attributed to
the negligible thermal shrinkage displayed by chemical-activated
resins. Processing shrinkage has been measured as 0.26% for a

representative chemical-activated resin, compared with 0.53% for
a representative heat-activated resin.
Given the preceding information regarding polymerization
shrinkage and denture base adaptation, chemical-activated resins
appear to provide significant advantages over heat-activated resins.
However, there are several other factors that affect the dimensional
characteristics of processed denture bases, including the type of
investing medium, method of resin introduction, and temperature used to activate the polymerization process.
On completion of the polymerization process, individual denture bases and master casts are retrieved and returned to their
respective dental articulator(s). Dimensional changes are assessed
with respect to the proposed vertical dimension of occlusion.
Fluid-resin techniques used in conjunction with hydrocolloid investing media generally yield decreases in the vertical
dimension. Conversely, dentures processed using heat-activated
or chemical-activated resins in conjunction with compression
molding techniques usually display increases in the overall
vertical dimension. Minimal increases in the vertical dimension are considered desirable because they permit a return to
the proposed occlusal vertical dimension via occlusal grinding
procedures.
Dimensional changes occurring in denture bases fabricated
from various resins are illustrated in Figure 11-12 as gaps at the
posterior palatal border. Additional dimensional factors include the
setting expansion of the gypsum product used to make the master
cast and investing component and expansion from water sorption
of the cured acrylic resin after polymerization is complete.

A

B

C

CHAPTER 11

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

D

E

245

• Figure 11-13 Heat-activated denture base resin exhibiting different types and degrees of porosity.
A, Properly polymerized; no porosity. B and C, Rapid heating, relatively small subsurface voids. D, Insufficient mixing of monomer and polymer; large voids resulting from localized polymerization shrinkage.
E, Insufficient pressure during polymerization; relatively large, irregular voids. (From Tuckfield WJ, Worner
HK, Guerin BD: Acrylic resins in dentistry. Aust Dent J, 47:119–121, 1943.)

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the causes of porosity when fluid-resin denture fabrication
techniques are used? How can these difficulties be minimized?

Porosity
Porosity is noted to likely develop in thicker portions of a denture base. Such porosity results from the vaporization of unreacted monomers when the temperature of a resin reaches or
exceeds the boiling points of these species. Nonetheless, this type
of porosity may not occur equally throughout the affected resin
segments.
Consider the specimens in Figure 11-13, A (no porosity) and
B and C (localized subsurface porosity). Specimens B and C
were flasked in such a manner that the section displaying porosity was nearer to the center of the investment mass, whereas the
nonporous section was nearer to the surface of the metal flask.
As might be expected, the metal conducted heat away from the
periphery, preventing the low-molecular-weight species from boiling and yielding porosity. In contrast, resin specimens surrounded
by larger amounts of gypsum, a poor thermal conductor, were
subjected to a significant exotherm that led to vaporization of lowmolecular-weight species and noticeable porosity.
Porosity also may result from inadequate mixing of powder and
liquid components. During polymerization, these regions shrink
more than adjacent regions, and the localized shrinkage tends to
produce voids (Figure 11-13, D). The occurrence of such porosity
can be minimized by ensuring the greatest possible homogeneity in the resin. Proper polymer-to-monomer ratios and well-controlled mixing procedures are essential. Because the material is
more homogeneous in the doughlike stage, delay packing is wise
until this consistency has been reached.
A third type of porosity can be caused by inadequate pressure or insufficient material in the mold during polymerization
(Figure 11-13, E). Voids resulting from these inadequacies are not
spherical; they assume irregular shapes. These voids may be so
abundant that the resultant resin appears significantly lighter and
more opaque than the intended color.
A final type of porosity most often associated with fluid resins
is air entrapment during mixing and pouring procedures. Careful
mixing, spruing, and venting are essential in preventing such voids.

Water Sorption
PMMA absorbs small amounts of water when placed in an aqueous environment. As water molecules penetrate the PMMA mass,
they occupy spaces between polymer chains. Consequently, the
affected polymer chains are forced apart. The introduction of
water molecules produces two important effects. First, the water
causes a slight expansion of the polymerized mass. Second, water
molecules interfere with the entanglement of polymer chains
and thereby act as plasticizers. This permits the relaxation of
stresses incurred during polymerization. As stresses are relieved,
polymerized resins may undergo changes in shape. Fortunately,
these changes are relatively minor and do not exert significant
effects on the fit or function of the processed denture bases.
For each 1% increase in weight produced by water sorption,
acrylic resin has been estimated to exhibit a linear expansion of
0.23%. Laboratory tests indicate that the linear expansion caused
by water sorption is approximately equal to the thermal shrinkage encountered as a result of the polymerization process. Hence,
these processes very nearly offset one another.
Because the presence of water adversely affects the physical and dimensional properties of denture base resins, diffusion
coefficients also warrant consideration. The diffusion coefficient
of water in representative heat-activated denture acrylic resin
is 0.011 × 10-6 cm2/s at 37 °C. For a representative chemicalactivated resin, the diffusion coefficient is 0.023 × 10-6 cm2/s.
Because the diffusion coefficients of water in representative denture resins are relatively low, the time required for a denture base
to reach saturation can be considerable. This is dependent on the
thickness of the resin and the storage conditions. A typical heatactivated denture base may require a period of 17 days to become
fully saturated with water.
The results of laboratory investigations indicate that there are
very slight differences in the dimensions of heat-activated and
chemical-activated denture bases following prolonged storage
in water. Compression-molded heat-activated denture bases are
slightly undersized when measured from second molar to second molar. Conversely, compression-molded chemical-activated
denture bases are slightly oversized when measured in the same
regions. The clinical significance of this difference is negligible.
ANSI/ADA Standard No. 139 identifies guidelines regarding
the testing and acceptance of denture base resins. To test water
sorption, a disk of material with specified dimensions is prepared

246

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

and dried to a constant weight. This weight is recorded as a baseline value. The disk is then soaked in 37 °C distilled water for
7 days. Again, the disk is weighed, and this value is compared with
the baseline value. According to the specification, weight gain following immersion must not be greater than 32 µg/mm3.

Solubility
Although denture base resins are soluble in a variety of liquids,
they are virtually insoluble in the fluids commonly encountered in
the oral cavity. ANSI/ADA Standard No. 139 prescribes a testing
regimen for the measurement of resin solubility. This procedure
is a continuation of the water-sorption test described in the preceding section. Following the required water immersion, the test
disk is permitted to dry and is reweighed. This value is compared
with the baseline value to determine weight loss. According to
the standard, weight loss must not be greater than 8.0 µg/mm3
for chemical-cured PMMA and 1.6 µg/mm3 for heat-, light-, and
microwave-activated PMMA.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the causes of processing stresses? What are the clinical
implications of these stresses, if any?

Processing Stresses
Whenever a natural dimensional change is inhibited, the affected
material sustains internal stresses. If stresses are relaxed, distortion
of the material can occur. This principle has important ramifications in the fabrication of denture bases because stresses are commonly induced during processing.
Consider the events that occur during denture base polymerization. A moderate amount of shrinkage occurs as individual
monomers are linked to form polymer chains. During this process, friction between the mold walls and soft resin may inhibit
normal shrinkage of these chains. In such instances, the polymer chains are stretched, and tensile stresses develop within the
material.
Stresses also are produced as a result of thermal shrinkage. As
a polymerized resin is cooled below this material’s glass-transition
temperature, the resin becomes relatively rigid. Further cooling
results in thermal shrinkage. A denture base resin is encased in a
rigid investing medium, such as dental gypsum, during this process. Because denture base resins and gypsum materials contract
at different rates, a contraction differential is established. This disparity in contraction rates yields stresses within the resin. Additional factors that may contribute to processing stresses include
improper mixing and handling of the resin and poorly controlled
heating and cooling of the flask assembly.

Crazing
When dimensional changes alone cannot relieve internal stresses,
hairline microcracks may develop as a means of dissipating energy
and completing relaxation. The production of such flaws, or
microcracks, is termed crazing.
Figure 11-14 shows crazing of denture base resin around
porcelain teeth. Such damage may occur during cooling of
the denture. When this occurs, the resin contracts more than
the adjacent porcelain, and tensile stresses are established in
the areas adjacent to the tooth. When these stresses exceed the

• Figure 11-14 Crazing around porcelain teeth.
tensile strength of the resin, microcracking occurs, and craze
lines result. Crazing in a transparent resin imparts a “hazy” or
“foggy” appearance. In a tinted resin, crazing imparts a whitish
appearance. Each craze line represents physical separation of the
resin caused by tensile stresses. In addition to esthetic effects,
these surface cracks predispose a denture resin to fracture. The
widespread use of acrylic resin teeth of similar thermal contraction of the denture base resins has decreased the incidence of
denture base crazing.
Crazing of denture base materials also may be induced by
organic solvents. When PMMA is immersed in ethanol, the
material swells as the ethanol diffuses into the PMMA mass. During this process, the solvent overcomes relatively weak van der
Waals forces and produces narrow gaps in the denture base resin.
Despite the creation of gaps, strong covalent bonds within the
polymeric chains maintain the overall integrity of the material.
Nevertheless, when the solvent evaporates, the gaps manifest as
craze lines.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What variables reduce the strength of acrylic resin denture bases? What
processing method is most likely to produce denture bases with decreased
fracture resistance?

Strength
The strength of an individual denture base resin is dependent on
many factors, including the composition of the resin, processing
technique, and conditions presented by the oral environment.
To provide acceptable physical properties, denture base resins
must meet or exceed the standards presented in ANSI/ADA Standard No. 139. A transverse test is used to evaluate the relationship
between the applied load and resultant deflection in a resin specimen of prescribed dimensions. Representative deflection–load
results are presented in Figure 11-15.
Inspection of Figure 11-15 reveals a curvature to each component of the deflection–load plot. Because no straight-line portion
is evident, one may assume that plastic deformation occurs during
the loading process. Some elastic deformation also occurs. From
a clinical standpoint, this means that load application produces
stresses within a resin and a change in the overall shape of the
denture base. When the load is released, stresses within the resin
are relaxed and the denture base begins to return to the denture’s

CHAPTER 11

247

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

7

Tested in

10

Air 32% R.H.
Air 32% R.H.
Water
Water

Water
Air
Water
Air

9
8
7
Deflection (mm)

Deflection (mm)

6

Condition in

2.5 h
– 5.7
kg
5.5
h–
6
.
3k
1
g
24 8 h
–6 9h
h
–
.
5 k 6.5
–
kg
6.
g
5
kg

8

5

4

3

kg
8
6. g
– k
h .9
48 – 6
h
72

6
5
4
3
2

2
1
0

1

0

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Load (kg)

• Figure 11-15 Transverse deflection–load curve for a typical denture
base resin, showing the influences of different conditioning procedures
and testing environments. Before testing, all specimens were conditioned
for 3 days as indicated. R.H., Relative humidity. (Data from Swaney AC,
Paffenbarger GC, Caul HJ, et al.: American Dental Association Specification No. 12 (replaced by No. 139 in 2012) for denture base resin, second
revision. J Am Dent Assoc, 46:54–66, 1953. Reprinted by permission of
ADA Publishing, a Division of ADA Business Enterprises, Inc.)

original shape. Nevertheless, plastic deformation prevents complete recovery.
Perhaps the most important determinant of resin strength is
the degree of polymerization exhibited by the material. As the
degree of polymerization increases, the strength of the resin also
increases. Hence, the polymerization cycle employed with a heatactivated resin is important. Figure 11-16 reveals the effects that
processing cycles exert on deflection–load properties. Note that
a longer polymerization cycle appears to yield improved physical
properties.
In comparison with heat-activated resins, the chemical-activated resins generally display lower degrees of polymerization. As
a result, chemical-activated resins exhibit increased levels of residual monomer and decreased strength and stiffness. Despite these
characteristics, heat- and chemical-activated resins display similar
elastic moduli.

2

3

4
Load (kg)

5

6

7

• Figure 11-16 Deflection–load curves for samples of poly(methyl methacrylate) polymerized for different periods at 71 °C (160 °F). Processing times
and fracture loads are noted on individual curves. (Data from Harman IM:
Effects of time and temperature on polymerization of a methacrylate resin
denture base. J Am Dent Assoc, 38:188–203, 1949. Reprinted by permission of ADA Publishing, a Division of ADA Business Enterprises, Inc.)

is dependent on specimen size and geometry, the distance between
specimen supports, and the presence or absence of notching.
Knoop hardness values for heat-activated resins may be as high
as 20 KHN, whereas the associated values for chemically activated
resins generally range from 16 to 18 KHN.

Creep
Acrylic denture resins display viscoelastic behavior. When a denture base resin is subjected to a sustained load, the material may
exhibit deformation with both elastic (recoverable) and plastic
(irrecoverable) components. If this load is not removed, additional
plastic deformation can occur over time. This additional deformation is termed creep.
The rate at which this progressive deformation occurs is termed
the creep rate. This rate can be elevated by increases in temperature,
applied load, residual monomer, and/or the presence of plasticizers. Although creep rates for heat-activated and chemical-activated
resins are very similar at low stresses, creep rates for chemical-activated resins increase more rapidly as stresses are raised.

Impact Strength and Hardness

Biological Properties of Denture Base Resins

Charpy impact strengths for heat-activated denture resins commonly range from 0.98 to 1.27 joules, whereas those for chemical-activated resins are somewhat lower (0.78 joules). Impact
strengths for high-impact resins such as Lucitone 199 may be
twice those reported for conventional PMMA resins. Increased
impact resistance is commonly imparted via the incorporation
of rubbery hydrocarbon components such as butyl acrylate and
polystyrene within the associated polymers. Clinicians should recognize that the preceding values are useful only for comparison of
products because the energy absorbed by an individual specimen

Infection-Control Procedures
Care should be taken to prevent microbial and viral crosscontamination between patients and dental personnel, including
personnel in the dental laboratory. New appliances should be disinfected before leaving the dental laboratory. Existing prostheses
should be disinfected before entering the laboratory and following
completion of laboratory procedures. All materials used for finishing and polishing should be handled according to established
infection-control guidelines. Items such as rag wheels should be

248

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

autoclaved, and materials such as pumice should be used according to unit-dose recommendations.

Critical Question
What is the optimal technique for repairing a fractured acrylic denture base?

Critical Question
Which components of denture resins are most likely to cause an allergic
reaction?

Additional Procedures Associated With
Dentures

Allergic Reactions

Denture Repair

Possible toxic or allergic reactions to PMMA have long been postulated. Reactions can occur following contact with the polymers,
residual monomers, benzoyl peroxide, hydroquinone inhibitor,
pigments, or a reaction product between some component of the
denture base and its environment. Despite the foregoing concerns,
adverse reactions are more commonly related to uninterrupted
denture wear.
Clinical experience indicates that true allergic reactions to
acrylic resins seldom occur in the oral cavity. Irritation is slightly
more common and is related to residual monomer. Irritation reactions are relatively rare because the residual monomer content of a
properly processed denture is less than 1%. Furthermore, surface
monomer is completely eliminated following storage in water for
at least 17 hours.
Reactions to residual monomer should occur shortly after
prosthesis delivery. However, the majority of patients reporting
sore mouth resulting from denture wear have worn the offending prostheses for months or even years. Clinical evaluation of
these cases indicates that tissue irritation is commonly related to
continuous intraoral wear, fungal colonization, poor oral hygiene,
trauma secondary to ill-fitting denture bases, and/or suboptimal
denture occlusion.
Repeated or prolonged contact with monomer can also result
in contact dermatitis. Personnel involved in the manipulation of
denture resins most commonly experience this condition. Hence
dental laboratory personnel should refrain from handling such
materials with bare hands. The high concentration of monomer
in freshly mixed resins may produce local irritation and serious
sensitization of the fingers.
Finally, it should be noted that inhalation of monomer vapor
may be detrimental. Therefore the use of monomer should be
restricted to well-ventilated areas.

Despite the favorable physical characteristics of denture base resins, denture bases sometimes fracture. In most instances, these
fractures can be repaired using compatible resins. Repair resins
may be light-, heat-, or chemical-activated.
To accurately accomplish the repair of a fractured prosthesis,
the clinician must realign the denture components and stabilize
them using an adherent wax or modeling plastic. When this has
been accomplished, a repair cast is generated using dental gypsum. The denture is then removed from the cast, and the luting
medium is eliminated. In turn, the fracture surfaces are trimmed
to provide sufficient room for repair material and produce a survivable repair joint. The gypsum cast is coated with separating
medium to prevent adherence of repair resin, and the denture base
sections are repositioned and affixed to the cast.
At this point, a repair material is chosen. Chemical-activated
resins are generally preferred over heat- and light-activated resins despite the fact that chemical-activated resins display lower
transverse strength and color change. The principal advantage
of chemical-activated resins is that they may be polymerized at
room temperature. Heat- and light-activated repair materials
must be placed in water baths and light chambers, respectively.
Heat generated by water baths and light chambers often causes
stress release and distortion of previously polymerized denture
base segments.
The following sequence is employed to accomplish denture
base repair using a chemical-activated resin. A small amount of
monomer is painted onto the prepared surfaces of the denture
base to promote bonding of the repair material. Increments of
monomer and polymer are added to the repair area using a small
sable-hair brush or suitable substitute. An excess of material is
placed at the repair site to account for polymerization shrinkage.
The assembly is placed in a pressure chamber under hot water and
allowed to polymerize. The repair site is then shaped, finished, and
polished using conventional techniques.

Toxicology
There is no evidence that commonly used dental resins produce
systemic toxic effects in humans. As previously noted, the amount
of residual monomer in processed PMMA is extremely low. To
enter the circulatory system, residual monomer must pass through
the oral mucosa and underlying tissues. These structures function
as barriers that significantly diminish the volume of monomer
reaching the bloodstream.
Residual monomer that does reach the bloodstream is rapidly
hydrolyzed to methacrylic acid and excreted. It is estimated that
the half-life of methyl methacrylate in circulating blood is 20 to
40 minutes.
Metal oxide (cadmium/selenium) red pigments were used for
many years to color denture base resins. Although toxic in all concentrations, the pigments are locked within the denture base polymer network and used in very small concentrations. Nevertheless,
most manufacturers have switched to organic pigment systems
(e.g., Cromophtal Red BRN) to avoid such toxic effects.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Under what conditions might resilient (soft) denture liners be used rather than
rebasing an acrylic denture base?

Short-Term and Long-Term Resilient Soft
Denture Liners
The purpose of a resilient soft denture liner is to absorb some of
the energy produced by masticatory impact. Hence, a soft liner
serves as a “shock absorber” between the occlusal surfaces of a denture and the underlying oral tissues. Liners also may provide added
retention by entering anatomical undercuts if present. The most
commonly used liners are plasticized acrylic resins. These resins
may be heat-activated or chemical-activated resins and are based
on familiar chemistries. Additional materials include silicone rubber, plasticized vinyl polymers and copolymers, polyphosphazene

CHAPTER 11

fluoropolymers, and fluoroethylene and polyvinyl siloxane addition-cured silicones.

Compositions
All soft denture liners exhibit glass-transition temperatures that
are lower than body temperature to allow sustained resilience.
Most common materials used gain that property by incorporating
plasticizer. Chairside resilient liners generally employ PMMA or
poly(ethyl methacrylate) powder as principal structural components mixed with liquids containing 60% to 80% plasticizer. The
plasticizer commonly is a large molecular species such as dibutyl phthalate or an alcohol. The distribution of large plasticizer
molecules reduces the entanglement of polymer chains, thereby
permitting individual chains to “slip” past one another, permitting
changes in the shape of the soft liner and providing a cushioning
effect for the underlying tissues. It is important to note that the
liquids used in such applications do not contain acrylic monomers. Consequently, the resultant liners are considered shortterm soft liners, or tissue conditioners.
Although plasticizers impart flexibility, they also present certain difficulties. Plasticizers are not bound within the resin mass.
Therefore they may be “leached out.” As this occurs, resilient liners
may become progressively more rigid. Hence, the use of liners that
are less prone to leaching is advantageous.
In recent years, the phthalate esters have attracted attention
because they mimic estrogenic hormones in the body after they
migrate from the liner. Alternatives are now in use, including trimellitates, aliphatic dibasic esters, phosphates, benzoates, citrate
esters, polymeric plasticizers, sulfonic acid, chloroparaffins, and
sorbitol.
As PMMA is replaced by higher-molecular-weight methacrylates (e.g., ethyl, n-propyl, and n-butyl), the Tg becomes progressively lower (Chapter 2, Thermal Properties). As a result, less
plasticizer is required, and the effects of leaching can be minimized.
Perhaps the most successful materials for soft liner applications
have been the silicone rubbers. These materials are not dependent
on leachable plasticizers, and they retain their elastic properties for
prolonged periods. Unfortunately, silicone rubbers do not absorb
shock and may lose adhesion to underlying denture bases over
time. They are prone to colonization by fungi, which grow in the
pores in the material and are difficult to remove.
Silicone rubbers may be chemical-activated or heat-activated
silicones. Chemical-activated silicones are supplied as two-component systems that polymerize via condensation reactions.
Processing Resilient Soft Denture Liners
To reline a denture, the denture base is relieved to permit an
acceptable thickness of the chosen material. A special adhesive is
applied to the surface of the denture base to facilitate bonding.
The resilient material is mixed, applied to the denture base via
compression molding, and permitted to polymerize. In turn, the
denture is recovered, finished, and polished. As with all resilient
liners, the use of rotary instruments that rotate from the liner
toward the denture base to prevent the initiation of peeling is
important.
Heat-activated silicones are one-component systems supplied
as pastes or gels. These materials are applied and contoured using
compression molding techniques. Heat-activated silicones may be
applied to polymerized resin bases, or they may be polymerized in
conjunction with freshly mixed resins.
To promote adhesion between silicone resilient liners and rigid
denture base materials, rubber-PMMA cements often are used.

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

249

These cements serve as chemical intermediates that bond to both
soft liners and denture resins. The strongest bonds occur against
fresh acrylic.
At least one silicone liner does not require an adhesive when
it is cured together with an acrylic denture base material. This
material actually is a silicone copolymer that contains components
capable of bonding with acrylic resins.

Care of Denture Resilient Soft Liners
All soft liners display certain shortcomings. For instance, silicone
liners are poorly adherent to denture base resins. Many resilient
soft liners bond well to denture bases but become progressively
more rigid as plasticizers are lost to the oral environment. Hardening rates for these liners are associated with the initial plasticizer
content. As the plasticizer content is increased, the probability of
plasticizer loss is increased. Hence, materials with a high initial
plasticizer content tend to harden rather rapidly.
Resilient liners also exert significant effects on associated denture bases. As the thickness of a soft liner is increased, the thickness of the accompanying denture base must be decreased, and
this results in decreased denture base strength. This may result in
fracture of the denture base during clinical service.
Perhaps the greatest difficulty associated with silicone longand short-term resilient liners is that these materials cannot be
cleaned effectively. As a result, patients often report disagreeable
tastes and odors related to these materials. The liners themselves
do not support mycotic growth, but such growth is supported by
debris that accumulates in the pores of these materials. The most
common fungal growth associated with soft liners is C. albicans.
Several cleaning regimens have been used in conjunction with
resilient liners. These regimens have met with limited success.
Both oxygenating and hypochlorite-type denture cleansers have
been employed. Unfortunately, these agents can cause significant
damage to resilient soft liners, particularly the silicone materials.
Mechanical cleaning of resilient liners also may lead to damage,
but such debridement often is necessary. If mechanical cleaning
is undertaken, a soft brush should be used in conjunction with a
mild detergent solution or nonabrasive dentifrice.
In attempts to address potential problems, antimycotic agents
have been incorporated into soft liners. Although this approach is
promising, the limited duration of antimycotic activity is far from
ideal. Therefore additional research is warranted.
In 1989, a long-term soft resilent liner was introduced that
uses a polyphosphazene fluoroelastomer with a –[P = N]– backbone and interpenetrating di- and tri-functional crosslinking
acrylics, pigment, and BaSO4 filler. The liner is compressionmolded against fresh acrylic and heat-cured conventionally. The
material has no plasticizers, absorbs chewing forces because of its
high energy damping, resists fungal overgrowth, is radiopaque,
and is machinable.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are denture reline materials considered temporary-use products?

Relining Resin Denture Bases
Because alveolar ridge contours change with time, it is sometimes
necessary to alter the tissue surfaces of prostheses to ensure proper
fit. In some instances, this can be achieved by selective grinding
procedures. In other instances, tissue surfaces must be replaced by
relining or rebasing existing dentures.

250

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

Relining involves replacement of the tissue surface of an existing denture, whereas rebasing involves replacement of the entire
denture base except for the denture teeth. In both instances, an
impression of the soft tissues is made using the existing denture
as an impression tray. A gypsum cast is generated in the impression, and the resultant assembly is invested in a denture flask.
Subsequently, the flask is opened and prepared for the introduction of resin.
At this stage, the impression material is removed from the denture. The tissue surface is cleaned to enhance bonding between the
existing denture base and the reline material. Next, an appropriate resin is introduced and shaped using a compression-molding
technique.
For relining, a low polymerization temperature is desirable
to minimize distortion of the remaining denture base. Hence, a
chemical-activated resin is usually chosen. The selected material is
mixed according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, placed
into the mold, compressed, and permitted to polymerize. Finally,
the denture is recovered, finished, and polished.
If a chemical-activated resin is selected for relining the existing denture, a specialized mounting assembly may be used in
lieu of flasking. This assembly maintains the correct vertical and
horizontal relationships between the cast and the denture, while
eliminating the need to encase the remaining denture base in dental gypsum. This facilitates recovery of the denture at the end of
the relining process.
Relining can also be accomplished using resins that are activated by heat, light, or microwave energy. In all of these instances,
significant heat can be generated, and distortion of the existing
denture base will be more likely.
Similar materials are marketed for home use. Unfortunately, the
majority of patients do not possess adequate knowledge to manipulate these materials correctly; therefore the use of such products
can result in damage to the oral tissues and should be discouraged.

Rebasing Resin Dentures
The steps required in denture rebasing are similar to those
described for relining. An accurate impression of the soft tissues
is made using the existing denture as a custom tray. Subsequently,
a gypsum cast is fabricated in the impression. The cast and denture are mounted in a device designed to maintain the correct
vertical and horizontal relationships between the gypsum cast and
surfaces of the prosthetic teeth. The resultant assembly provides
indices for the occlusal surfaces of the prosthetic teeth. After these
indices have been established, the denture is removed, and the
teeth are separated from the existing denture base. The teeth are
repositioned in their respective indices and held in their original
relationships to the cast while they are waxed to a new baseplate.
At this point, the denture base is waxed to the desired form.
The completed tooth arrangement is sealed to the cast, and the
assembly is invested as previously described. Following elimination of the wax and removal of the baseplate, freshly mixed denture base resin is introduced into the mold cavity. Subsequently,
the denture base is processed, recovered, finished, and polished.
The completed prosthesis consists of a new denture base in conjunction with teeth from the patient’s previous denture.

Resin Impression Trays and Tray Materials
Resin trays are commonly used in dental impression procedures.
Unlike stock trays, resin impression trays are fabricated to fit the

arches of individual patients. Therefore resin impression trays are
commonly called “custom trays.”
The majority of custom trays are fabricated using light-activated and chemical-activated resin systems. Each system has
advantages and disadvantages. Light-activated materials eliminate
methyl methacrylate exposure but are more expensive and require
high-intensity light units for polymerization. Chemical-activated
resins are less expensive but have been associated with contact dermatitis, particularly in laboratory personnel.
The steps in custom tray fabrication may be described as follows: A preliminary impression is made using a stock tray and an
appropriate impression material. In turn, a gypsum cast is generated. A suitable spacer (e.g., putty silicone [avoid wax]) is placed
on the gypsum cast to provide the desired relief. Subsequently, a
separating medium is applied to the surface of the cast. At this
stage, fabrication techniques for light-activated materials and
chemical-activated materials become divergent.
Light-activated resins are supplied in rope, sheet, and gel forms.
Sheet forms are preferred for custom tray fabrication because of
their favorable handling characteristics. Individual sheets are pliable and can be adapted to the associated casts and spacers with
relative ease. A handle is added to facilitate removal of the tray
from the mouth, the entire assembly is placed in a light chamber,
and the resin is polymerized.
Chemical-activated resins typically are PMMA and are supplied as powder–liquid systems. The components are mixed to
form a doughlike mass. The dough is then rolled into a sheet
approximately 2 mm thick, adapted to the diagnostic cast with a
handle as described previously, and allowed to polymerize.
Upon completion of the fabrication process, both light-activated and chemical-activated custom trays are removed from the
associated casts and mechanically trimmed. The peripheries are
rounded to make sure that patients will not be harmed by sharp
or irregular edges. At this point, trays are evaluated intraorally and
refined as necessary.

Denture Cleansers
Patients use a wide variety of agents for cleaning artificial dentures. These include dentifrices, proprietary denture cleansers,
mild detergents, household cleansers, bleaches, and vinegar.
The most common commercial products are based on immersion techniques. These cleansers are marketed in powder and
tablet forms containing alkaline compounds, detergents, sodium
perborate, and flavoring agents. When dissolved in water, sodium
perborate decomposes to form an alkaline peroxide solution. This
solution subsequently releases oxygen, which loosens debris via
mechanical means.
Household bleaches (hypochlorites) are also used in denture
cleaning applications. Dilute bleach solutions can be used to
remove certain types of stains. Unfortunately, prolonged use of
bleach-containing solutions can remove color from denture bases,
denture liners, and prosthetic teeth.
Bleaches and bleach solutions should not be used for cleaning
metal prostheses such as removable partial denture frameworks.
These solutions produce significant darkening of base metals and
may irreparably damage the affected prostheses.
The use of brushes and abrasive cleansers can produce a range
of effects on resin surfaces. Toothbrushes alone produce minimal
wear of resin surfaces. Toothbrushes in conjunction with most
commercial dentifrices, mild detergents, and soaps also appear
to be relatively nondestructive. Conversely, household cleansers,

CHAPTER 11

such as kitchen and bathroom abrasives, are contraindicated. Prolonged use of such cleansers may cause noticeable wear of resin
surfaces and adversely affect the function and esthetics of these
prostheses. Therefore patients should be educated regarding the
care and cleaning of dental prostheses.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What precautions should be taken when using porcelain teeth in a denture?
What are the clinically relevant differences between porcelain teeth and
acrylic resin teeth?

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

251

Unfortunately, porcelain teeth often cause significant wear of
opposing enamel, metal, and resin tooth surfaces, especially when
contacting surfaces have been roughened. As a result, porcelain
teeth should not oppose such surfaces, and if they are used, they
should be polished periodically to reduce abrasive damage.
It should be noted that resin teeth are capable of chemical
bonding with commonly used denture base resins. Porcelain teeth
do not form chemical bonds with denture base resins and must be
retained by bonded pins, mechanical undercuts, and/or silanization. As an additional consideration, leakage at the tooth–denture
base junction can be seen as a dark line when food and microbes
penetrate the interface.

Resin Teeth for Prosthetic Applications
The majority of preformed artificial teeth sold in the United States
are made of acrylic or vinyl-acrylic resins. As might be expected,
the methacrylate chemistries used in the fabrication of prosthetic
teeth are similar to those used in denture base construction. The
degree of crosslinking at the occlusal and incisal surfaces of prosthetic teeth is much greater than that exhibited by polymerized
denture base materials. The increased crosslinking of prosthetic
teeth in conjunction with the addition of inorganic filler increases
wear resistance and improves clinical properties.
Cervical portions of prosthetic teeth often exhibit reduced
crosslinking to facilitate chemical bonding with denture base
resins. Additional retention may be achieved by removing the
glossy “ridge-lap” surfaces of resin teeth and preparing mechanical
undercuts.
Chemical bonding between resin teeth and heat-activated denture base materials has proven extremely effective. Nevertheless,
bond failures can occur if ridge-lap surfaces are contaminated by
residual wax or misplaced separating media. To optimize bonding,
gypsum molds must be flushed with hot water, and the exposed cervical portions of prosthetic teeth must be thoroughly cleaned with
mild detergent solutions. Separating media must be applied to gypsum mold surfaces but must not extend onto the exposed surfaces of
resin teeth. As a final measure, ridge-lap surfaces should be wetted
with monomer immediately before resin introduction.
To enhance the wear resistance of prosthetic dentitions, manufacturers have introduced “hybrid” teeth exhibiting multilayer construction. These teeth include both resin composites and PMMA
components. Resin composites are found primarily on occlusal
and incisal surfaces of the prosthetic teeth and are intended to provide improved wear resistance. Unfortunately, chemical bonding
between resin composites and heat-activated denture base materials is inferior to that which occurs between resin teeth and such
denture base materials. To address this shortcoming, manufacturers have incorporated PMMA at the ridge-lap and lingual surfaces
of hybrid teeth. The presence of PMMA on these surfaces facilitates predictable bonding with heat-activated PMMA resins. Nevertheless, operators must be certain not to eliminate the PMMA
surfaces during the tooth-arrangement process.
Despite the current emphasis on resin teeth, prosthetic teeth
also may be fabricated using vacuum- or pressure-fired feldspathic
porcelains. Hence a comparison of resin and porcelain teeth is
warranted.
Resin teeth display greater impact resistance and ductility than
porcelain teeth. As a result, resin teeth are less likely to chip or
fracture on impact, such as when a denture is dropped. Furthermore, resin teeth are easier to adjust, and they display greater
resistance to thermal shock. In contrast, porcelain teeth display
improved dimensional stability and increased wear resistance.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the benefits and drawbacks of the materials used in the
construction of maxillofacial prostheses?

Materials for Maxillofacial Prosthetics
For centuries, prostheses have been used to mask maxillofacial
defects. The ancient Egyptians and Chinese used waxes and resins to reconstruct missing portions of the craniofacial complex. In
the 16th century, the French surgeon Ambroise Paré described a
variety of simple prostheses used for the cosmetic and functional
replacement of maxillofacial structures. During the ensuing years,
restorative techniques and materials were improved and refined.
Casualties in World Wars I and II established an increased need for
maxillofacial prosthetics, and the dental profession assumed a major
role in maxillofacial reconstruction and rehabilitation processes.
Despite improvements in surgical and restorative techniques,
the materials used in maxillofacial prosthetics are far from ideal.
An ideal material should be inexpensive, biocompatible, strong,
and stable. In addition, the material should be skinlike in color
and texture. Maxillofacial materials should exhibit tear resistance when used in thin films, should exhibit compatibility with
skin adhesives, and should be able to withstand moderate thermal and chemical challenges. Currently, no material fulfills all of
these requirements. A brief summary of maxillofacial materials is
included in the following paragraphs.

Latexes
Latexes are soft, inexpensive materials that can be used to create
lifelike prostheses. Unfortunately, these materials are weak, degenerate rapidly, and exhibit color instability. Therefore latexes are
rarely used in the fabrication of long-term maxillofacial prostheses.
One synthetic latex is a terpolymer of butyl acrylate, methyl
methacrylate, and methyl methacrylamide. Superior to natural
latex, this material is nearly transparent. Colorants are sprayed
onto the reverse or tissue side of the prosthesis, thereby providing enhanced translucency and improved blending. Despite these
advantages, the associated technical processes are lengthy, and the
resultant prostheses last only a few months. Therefore synthetic
latexes have limited applications.

Vinyl Plastisols
Plasticized vinyl resins are sometimes used in maxillofacial applications. Plastisols are thick liquids composed of small vinyl particles
dispersed in a plasticizer. Colorants are added to these materials

252

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

to match individual skin tones. Subsequently, vinyl plastisols are
heated to impart desired physical characteristics. Unfortunately,
vinyl plastisols harden with age as a result of plasticizer migration.
Ultraviolet light also has an adverse effect on these materials. For
these reasons, the usefulness of vinyl plastisols is limited.

procedure. A gypsum mold may be housed within a brass denture
flask, but this increases the risk of damage to the silicone material
during deflasking.

Silicone Rubbers

Polyurethane also can be used in maxillofacial prosthetics. Fabrication of a polyurethane prosthesis requires accurate proportioning
of three components. The material is placed in a gypsum or metal
mold and allowed to polymerize at room temperature. Although
a polyurethane prosthesis has a natural feel and appearance, it is
susceptible to rapid deterioration, color change from the diet, and
fungal growth.

Silicones were introduced in the mid-1940s and have been used
in maxillofacial applications since the 1950s. Both heat-curing
and room-temperature–curing silicones are in use today, and both
exhibit advantages and disadvantages.
Room-temperature–curing silicones are supplied as singlecomponent materials that cure by the evaporation of acetic acid.
They are intrinsically colored by the addition of dyed rayon fibers,
dry earth pigments, and/or oil-based pigments. Prostheses are
polymerized by bulk packing in two- or three-part gypsum molds,
although more durable molds have been made from epoxy resins
or metals.
Heat-curing silicones are supplied as semisolid or puttylike
materials and are intrinsically colored via the addition of suitable pigments. Following introduction into an appropriately constructed mold, the resultant assembly is exposed to a 30-minute
heat application cycle at 180 °C. Heat-curing silicones display better strength and color stability than room-temperature–curing silicones. Nevertheless, all silicones are susceptible to fungal growth
and fraying at fine margins, so a process of bonding to a sheet of
polyurethane on the tissue surface has been developed. This process not only enhances prosthesis longevity but also improves the
effectiveness of skin adhesives.
The major disadvantage of heat-curing silicones is the requirement for a milling machine and a press. Furthermore, a metal
mold normally is used, and fabrication of the mold is a lengthy

Selected Readings
Arima T, Murata H, Hamad T: The effects of cross-linking agents on
the water sorption and solubility characteristics of denture base
resins, J Oral Rehabil, 23:476–480, 1996.
Bartoloni JA, Murchison DF, Wofford DT, et al: Degree of conversion
in denture base materials for varied polymerization techniques, J Oral
Rehabil, 27:488–493, 2000.
Jagger DC, Jagger RG, Allen SM, et al: An investigation into the transverse and impact strength of “high strength” denture base acrylic resins, J Oral Rehabil, 29:263–267, 2002.
Machado C, Sanchez E, Azer SS, et al: Comparative study of the transverse
strength of three denture base materials, J Dent, 35:930–933, 2007.
Rached RN, Powers JM, Del Bel Cury AA: Repair strength of autopolymerizing, microwave, and conventional heat-polymerized acrylic
resins, J Prosthet Dent, 92:79–82, 2004.

Polyurethane Polymers

Chlorinated Polyethylene
In an effort to overcome the deficiencies of the latex, vinyl plastisol, silicone, and polyurethane materials, a thermoplastic elastomer based on chlorinated polyethylene (CPE) was investigated
in the 1970s and 1980s. With further development, CPE was
shown to provide higher edge strength, permanent elasticity, and
minimal fungal growth. In a recent randomized, controlled clinical trial, it was found that the material was equally preferred by
patients who had never worn facial prostheses before, but patients
who had worn silicone rubber prostheses in the past favored that
material in the trial. Methods of layering the prosthetic material
in the molds to develop color at depth and laminating surface
coloration were also reported, which may be useful in future maxillofacial prosthetics applications.
Additional information may be found in a review by Lemon
et al. (2005), which presents current concepts regarding facial
prosthetic rehabilitation of patients with head and neck cancer
and facial prosthetic biomaterials.

Stafford GD, Bates JF, Huggett R, et al: A review of the properties of
some denture base polymers, J Dent, 8:292–306, 1960.
Swaney AC, Paffenbarger GC, Caul HJ, et al: American Dental Association Specification No. 12 for denture base resin, ed. 2, J Am Dent
Assoc, 46:54–66, 1953.
Takahashi Y, Chai J, Takahashi T, et al: Bond strength of denture teeth to
denture base resins, Int J Prosthodont, 13:59–65, 2000.
Takamata T, Setcos JC: Resin denture bases: Review of accuracy and
methods of polymerization, Int J Prosthodont, 2:555–562, 1989.
Wong D, Cheng LYY, Chow TW, et al: Effect of processing method on
the dimensional accuracy and water sorption of acrylic resin dentures,
J Prosthet Dent, 81:300–304, 1999.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Arima T, Murata H, Hamad T: The effects of cross-linking agents on
the water sorption and solubility characteristics of denture base resins, J Oral Rehabil, 23:476–480, 1996.
Bartoloni JA, Murchison DF, Wofford DT, et al: Degree of conversion
in denture base materials for varied polymerization techniques, J Oral
Rehabil, 27:488–493, 2000.
Blagojevic V, Murphy VM: Microwave polymerization of denture base
materials: a comparative study, J Oral Rehabil, 26:804–808, 1999.
Caswell CW, Norling BK: Comparative study of the bond strengths of
three abrasion-resistant plastic denture teeth bonded to a cross-linked
and a grafted, cross-linked denture base material, J Prosthet Dent,
55:701–708, 1986.
Chai J, Takahashi Y, Takahashi T, et al: Bonding durability of conventional resinous denture teeth and highly crosslinked denture teeth to a
pour-type denture resin, Int J Prosthodont, 13:112–116, 2000.
Clancy JMS, Boyer DB: Comparative bond strengths of light-cured,
heat-cured, and autopolymerizing denture resins to denture teeth,
J Prosthet Dent, 61:457–462, 1989.
Compagnoni MA, Barros Barbosa D, de Souza RF, et al: The effect of
polymerization cycles on porosity of microwave-processed denture
base resin, J Prosthet Dent, 91:281–285, 2004.
Cunningham JL, Benington IC: An investigation of the variables which
may affect the bond between plastic teeth and denture base resin,
J Dent, 27:129–135, 1999.
Dhir G, Berzins DW, Dhuru VB, et al: Physical properties of denture
base resins potentially resistant to Candida adhesion, J Prosthodont,
16:465–472, 2007.
Gettleman LM: Chlorinated polyethylene and polyphosphazenes. In Setcos JC (editor): Materials research in maxillofacial prosthetics, Trans
Acad Dent Mater, 5:156–172, 1992.
Gettleman LM: Uses of polyphosphazene in dentistry. Chapter 2. In Mario
G, Roger D, editors: Applicative Aspects of Poly(organophosphazenes),
New York, 2004, Nova Science Publishers, pp 33–47.
Gettleman LM, Vargo JM, Goist KC, et al: Laboratory and clinical testing of a polyphosphazene resilient denture liner vs. a silicone rubber
liner editor. In Kawahara H, editor: Oral Implantology and Biomaterials, Amsterdam, 1989, Elsevier. Progress in Biomedical Engineering
Series, pp 15–20.
Goodacre CJ, Garbacea A, Naylor P, et al: CAD/CAM fabricated complete dentures: Concepts and clinical methods of obtaining required
morphological data, J Prosthet Dent, 107:34–46, 2012.
Jagger DC, Jagger RG, Allen SM, et al: An investigation into the transverse and impact strength of “high strength” denture base acrylic resins, J Oral Rehabil, 29:263–267, 2002.
Jorge JH, Giampaolo ET, Machado AL, et al: Cytotoxicity of denture
base acrylic resins: A literature review, J Prosthet Dent, 90:190–193,
2003.
Jorge JH, Giampaolo ET, Vergani CE, et al. Cytotoxicity of denture base
resins: Effect of water bath and microwave postpolymerization heat
treatments, Int J Prosthodont, 7:340–344, 2004.
Kanazawa M, Inokoshi M, Minakuchi S, et al: Trial of a CAD/CAM system for fabricating complete dentures, Dent Mater J, 30:93–96, 2011.

Kawahata N, Ono H, Nishi Y, et al: Trial duplication procedure for complete dentures by CAD/CAM, J Oral Rehabil, 24:540–548, 1997.
Kiat-amnuay S, Jacob RF, Chambers MS, et al: Clinical trial of chlorinated polyethylene for facial prosthetics, Int J Prosthodont, 23:263–
270, 2010.
Lemon JC, Kiat-amnuay S, Gettleman LM, et al: Facial prosthetic rehabilitation: preprosthetic surgical techniques and biomaterials, Curr
Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg, 13:255–262, 2005.
Levin B, Sanders JL, Reitz PV: The use of microwave energy for processing acrylic resins, J Prosthet Dent, 61:381–383, 1989.
Machado C, Sanchez E, Azer SS, et al: Comparative study of the transverse strength of three denture base materials, J Dent, 35:930–933,
2007.
Maeda Y, Minoura M, Tsutsumi S, et al: A CAD/CAM system for removable denture. Part 1: Fabrication of complete dentures, Int J Prosthodont, 7:17–21, 1994.
Monsenego P, Baszkin A, de Lourdes Costa J, et al: Complete denture
retention. Part II Wettability studies on various acrylic resin denture
base materials, J Prosthet Dent, 62:308–312, 1989.
Phoenix RD, Mansueto MA, Ackerman NA, et al: Evaluation of mechanical and thermal properties of commonly used denture base resins,
J Prosthodont, 13:17–27, 2003.
Rached RN, Powers JM, Del Bel Cury AA: Repair strength of autopolymerizing, microwave, and conventional heat-polymerized acrylic
resins, J Prosthet Dent, 92:79–82, 2004.
Sanders JL, Levin B, Reitz PV: Porosity in denture acrylic resins cured by
microwave energy, Quintessence Int, 18:453–456, 1987.
Sarac YS, Sarac D, Kulunk T, et al: The effect of chemical surface treatments of different denture base resins on the shear bond strength of
denture repair, J Prosthet Dent, 94:259–266, 2005.
Shlosberg SR, Goodacre CJ, Munoz CA, et al: Microwave energy polymerization of poly(methyl methacrylate) denture base resin, Int J Prosthodont, 2:453–458, 1989.
Stafford GD, Bates JF, Huggett R, et al: A review of the properties of
some denture base polymers, J Dent, 8:292–306, 1960.
Swaney AC, Paffenbarger GC, Caul HJ, et al: American Dental Association Specification No. 12 for denture base resin: second revision, J Am
Dent Assoc, 46:54–66, 1953.
Takahashi Y, Chai J, Takahashi T, et al: Bond strength of denture teeth to
denture base resins, Int J Prosthodont, 13:59–65, 2000.
Takamata T, Setcos JC: Resin denture bases: Review of accuracy and
methods of polymerization, Int J Prosthodont, 2:555–562, 1989.
The Academy of Prosthodontics: The Glossary of Prosthodontic Terms,
9th ed, J Prosthet Dent, 117(5S):e1–e105, 2017.
Tsuchiya H, Hoshino Y, Tajima K, et al: Leaching and cytotoxicity of
formaldehyde and methyl methacrylate from acrylic resin denture
base materials, J Prosthet Dent, 71:618–624, 1994.
Tuckfield WJ, Worner HK, Guerin BD: Acrylic resins in dentistry, Aust
Dent J, 47:119–121, 1943.
Wong D, Cheng LYY, Chow TW, et al: Effect of processing method on
the dimensional accuracy and water sorption of acrylic resin dentures,
J Prosthet Dent, 81:300–304, 1999.
Zappini G, Kammann A, Wachter W: Comparison of fracture tests of
denture base materials, J Prosthet Dent, 90:578–585, 2003.

252.e1

