5

Resin-Based Composites
OUTLINE
History of Composites

Repair of Composites

Composition and Function

Composite-Based Indirect Restorations

Classification of Dental Composites

Selection Criteria for Posterior Composites

Properties of Resin-Based Composites

Photocuring Training, Evaluation, and Process Management

Finishing and Polishing of Composites

KEY TERMS
Activation Process by which sufficient energy is provided to
induce an initiator to generate free radicals and cause polymerization to begin.
Activator Source of energy used to activate an initiator and
produce free radicals; the source of energy can be an electrondonating chemical, light, and/or heat.
C-factor Configuration factor. This represents the ratio between
the bonded surface area of a resin-based composite restoration and the nonbonded or free surface area. The greater the
C-factor, the greater the stress that develops at the restoration
margin, which can lead to gap formation, marginal breakdown
and leakage, and other problems (e.g., secondary caries).
Chemical-activated/self-cured/resin/composite Composite system consisting of two pastes—one containing an initiator and
the other an activator—which, when mixed together, release
free radicals that initiate polymerization. Many terms have been
used throughout the development of this material; we will use
either chemical-activated or self-cured in this book.
Coupling agent A compound that provides chemical bonds between two dissimilar classes of materials. For example, organosilane compounds are applied to the surfaces of silicate-based
fillers to ensure that they are chemically bonded to the resin
matrix of a dental composite.
Degree of conversion (DC) Percentage of carbon–carbon double
bonds (–C = C–) converted to single bonds (–C—C–) during curing to form a polymeric resin. Also known as degree of cure and
degree of monomer-to-polymer conversion.
Dental composite Highly crosslinked polymeric materials
reinforced by a dispersion of amorphous silica, glass, crystalline, mineral, or organic resin filler particles and/or short fibers
bonded to the matrix by a coupling agent. In dentistry, it is
often called just “composite.”
Depth of cure Depth or thickness of a light-cured resin that has
attained adequate mechanical strength from polymerization
when exposed to a light source under a specific set of conditions.
Dual-cured resin Dental composite that contains both chemical-activated and light-activated components to initiate

polymerization and potentially overcome the limitations of
either the chemical- or light-cured system when used alone.
Filler Inorganic, glass, and/or organic-resin particles that are dispersed in a resin matrix to increase rigidity, strength, and wear
resistance and to decrease thermal expansion, water sorption,
and polymerization shrinkage. Radiopaque fillers can also be
added to impart radiopacity to dental composites. Aluminofluorosilicate fillers can be added to release fluoride from dental
composites.
Flowable composite Hybrid composite with reduced filler level
and a narrower particle-size distribution to increase flow and
promote intimate adaptation to prepared tooth surfaces. Flowable composites are often used as the first layer of a cavity filling
to improve filling adaptation to the cavity.
Free radical An atom or group of atoms (R) with an unpaired electron (•). R•-producing reactions initiate and propagate polymerization and eventually lead to a final set.
Gel point/gelation The point in the polymerization reaction
where sufficient crosslinks have formed to produce a rigid,
glassy state in which internal flow among the developing
polymer chains has stopped. All but localized molecular motion
has stopped. After the gel point, stresses cannot be relieved but
instead continue to increase and concentrate near the bonded
interfaces. Thus, reducing the polymerization rate provides
more time for adjacent polymer chain segments to slip among
themselves to lower-energy configurations and relieve developing stresses before the polymerization reaches gel point.
Inhibitor A chemical added to resin systems to minimize spontaneous polymerization to extend the storage life of the resin
through free radical–scavenging mechanisms. It also increases
the working time of self-cured resin composites.
Initiator A free radical−forming chemical used to start the polymerization reaction. It enters into the chemical reaction and
becomes part of the final polymer compound; thus it is not a
catalyst, although it is often incorrectly labeled as such.
Light-cured/light-activated resin/composite Resin or particlefilled resin consisting of a single component that becomes polymerized through the use of a photosensitive initiator system

87

88

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

(typically camphorquinone and an amine) and a light-source
activator (typically visible blue light). Photocured and photoinitiated are also used in the literature; we will use either light-activated or light-cured in this book.
Matrix A plastic resin material that forms a continuous phase
upon curing and binds the reinforcing filler particles.

Oxygen-inhibited layer The thin surface region of a polymerized
resin containing unreacted methacrylate groups arising from
dissolved oxygen, which acts to inhibit the free radical polymerization curing reaction; also known as the air-inhibited layer.
Resin Blend of monomers and/or macromolecules with other
components that form a material with a set of useful properties.

The gold standard of reference for restorative filling materials is
amalgam. However, amalgam has its own disadvantages, such as
(1) poor esthetics, (2) unfounded concerns about health hazards
from the leakage of mercury, and (3) waste-disposal concerns.
Because resin-based composites can be made to match the natural
appearance of teeth, they have become the most popular of the
esthetic or tooth-colored filling materials and are widely used for a
variety of dental applications.
Another key advantage of resin materials is that they can be
made in a range of consistencies, from highly fluid to rigid pastes,
which allows them to be conveniently manipulated and molded to
a custom-made form, and then converted through a polymerization curing reaction to a hard, strong, attractive, and durable solid.

shrinkage, radiopacity, and thermal expansion compared with
unfilled acrylic. However, these composites suffered from roughening of the surface as a result of the selective abrasion of the
softer resin matrix surrounding the harder filler particles and were
not very esthetic. To improve surface smoothness and retain or
improve the physical and mechanical properties of traditional
composites, small-particle-filled composites were developed using
inorganic fillers ground to a size range of about 0.5 to 3 μm but
with a broad size distribution allowing a higher filler loading (80%
to 90% by weight or 65% to 77% by volume). This resulted not
only in smoother surfaces but also greater wear resistance and
some decrease in polymerization shrinkage. Further advances in
the filler component have resulted in microfill composites and
nanocomposites, hybrid composites, and packable and flowable
composites, just to name a few.
Other advances with the monomer component provide better
chemical and mechanical properties, reduced shrinkage, color and
storage stability, biocompatibility, and other features. Today, resin
matrix-forming monomers in composite resins are highly complex
and use a variety of monomers and monomer blends of various
molecular weights and functions.
Finally, advances in curing technology have yielded light-cured
systems that make curing resins on demand possible and improve
working time and ease of manipulation. Initially an ultraviolet
(UV) curing system was used, but this system had several drawbacks and was soon replaced by visible blue-light curing systems.
These advances were soon followed by further developments in
curing-lamp technology, going from tungsten light bulbs to lightemitting diodes (LEDs).
Figure 5-1 illustrates the history of and achievements in dental
composites.

History of Composites
During the first half of the 20th century, silicates were the toothcolored material of choice for cavity restoration. Silicates release
fluoride and are excellent for preventing caries, but they become
severely eroded within a few years. Acrylic resins, which are based
on polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), soon replaced silicates for
their tooth-like appearance, insolubility in oral fluids, ease of
manipulation, and low cost. Unfortunately, these acrylic resins
had relatively poor wear resistance and tended to shrink severely
during setting, which caused them to pull away from the cavity
walls, thereby producing crevices or gaps that facilitate leakage
within these gaps. In addition, thermal expansion and contraction
caused further stresses to develop at the cavity margins when hot
or cold beverages and foods were consumed.
These problems were reduced somewhat by incorporating
quartz particles in the resin. The filler does not take part in the setting reaction but occupies space that reduces the number of reactions taking place and the corresponding shrinkage. In addition,
commonly used fillers have a low coefficient of thermal expansion.
However, these filler-reinforced PMMA resins were not very successful, in part because the fillers do not bond chemically to the
resin. Thus defects developed between the fillers and the surrounding resin and led to leakage, staining, and poor wear resistance.
In 1962, Bowen developed a new type of composite material
that largely overcame these problems. Bowen’s main innovations
were bisphenol-A glycidyl dimethacrylate (bis-GMA), a monomer
that forms a crosslinked matrix that is highly durable, and a surface treatment using an organic silane compound called a coupling
agent to bond the filler particles to the resin matrix. Current toothcolored restorative materials continue to use this technology, but
many further innovations have been introduced since then.
In the late 1960s, a category now known as traditional composites (also known as conventional or macrofill composites) was
developed; this contained very large particles of ground amorphous silica and quartz, which imparted significant improvements in mechanical properties, water sorption, polymerization

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the three essential components of resin composite materials?

Composition and Function
Dental composites are made up of three major components: a
highly crosslinked polymeric resin matrix; a dispersion of glass,
silica, crystalline, metal oxide, resin-reinforcing particles, short
fibers, or their combinations as filler; and a coupling agent
bonding filler to the matrix. In addition, there is an activator–
initiator system that converts the soft, moldable filling material
to a hard, durable restoration, and there are combinations of
pigments to match the color of tooth structure. Other additives
include UV absorbers to improve color stability; inhibitors to
extend storage life and increase working time for chemical-activated resins; and components to enhance performance, appearance, and durability.

Resin-Based Composites

CHAPTER 5

89

Composite Refinements
1955–2020
Nonbonded
composites

Dentin-bonded
composites

Acid-etching and
enamel bonding

1950

1960

Original
development

1970

3 part, 2 part, 1 part
Dentin bonding systems

1980

MACROFILL
Self-cured
composites

1990

FLOWABLE
composites

MICROFILL
composites

MIDFILL
composites

2000

Self-cured
UV-cured

2020

BULK FILL, UNIVERSAL,
SELF-ADHESIVE &
BIOACTIVE
composites

PACKABLE
composites

MIDFILL
composites

2010

NANOFILL &
MINIHYBRID
NANOHYBRID
MIDHYBRID composites
composites
composites
CONTROLLED/
LOW SHRINKAGE
composites
Visible light-cured
(QTH, PAC, Laser, LED)

• Figure 5-1 Chronology of dental composite developments in monomer, filler, bonding, and curing technologies. LED, Light-emitting diodes; QTH, quartz-tungsten-halogen. (Adapted from Bayne SC: Dental
biomaterials: where are we and where are we going? J Dent Educ 69:571−585, 2005.)

O

O
O

O

O

O
OH

OH

bis-GMA
H

O
O

O
O

N
N

O

O
O

H

O

UDMA

O
O

O
O

O

O

TEGDMA
• Figure 5-2 Chemical structure of bisphenol A glycidyl dimethacrylate (bis-GMA), urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA), and triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA).

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What roles do bis-GMA and other high-molecular-weight dimethacrylate
monomers play in the function and performance of dental resins?
Why are diluent monomers used, and what are the tradeoffs for their use?

Matrix
The resin matrix in most dental composites is based on a blend
of aromatic and/or aliphatic dimethacrylate monomers such as
bisphenol A glycidyl methacrylate (bis-GMA) and urethane

dimethacrylate (UDMA) (Figure 5-2) that form crosslinked,
strong, rigid, and durable polymer structures. Note that the methacrylate groups are found at the ends of the chain or at the end of
branching chains. Bis-GMA resin is a dimethacrylate of aromatic
esters synthesized from an epoxy resin of ethylene glycol of bisphenol A and methyl methacrylate. The two −OH groups of this
material forming hydrogen bonds between the monomers make
it extremely viscous. The rigid core of two aromatic groups limits
the ability of bis-GMA molecules to rotate efficiently to participate in the polymerization process that often leaves one of the two

90

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

methacrylate groups unpolymerized. This results in one end of a
bis-GMA becoming part of a polymer chain and the rest of the
molecule becoming a methacrylate terminated pendant group.
The efficiency of polymerization and crosslinking is expressed by
the percentage of reacted (converted) methacrylate groups after
polymerization and is known as the degree of conversion (DC).
Various dimethacrylate resin combinations have been
explored through the years in attempts to reduce viscosity and
increase the DC. The UDMAs have shown particular promise. UDMA resins are any monomer containing one or more
urethane groups (–NH–CO–O–) and two methacrylate end
groups (Figure 5-2).
Because of the large molecular volume of these monomers,
polymerization shrinkage can be as low as 0.9% (average of 1.5%
compared with a range of 2% to 3% for most composites) when
combined with inorganic particulate fillers at levels of up to 88%
by weight. UDMA (about 20 Pa·s) and bis-GMA (about 800
Pa·s, similar to honey on a cold day) are highly viscous and are
difficult to blend and manipulate. Thus varying proportions of
lower-molecular-weight highly fluid monomers such as triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA; 0.005 to 0.05 Pa·s;
Figure 5-2) and other lower-molecular-weight dimethacrylates to
blend with and dilute the viscous components to attain resin
pastes sufficiently fluid for clinical manipulation and for incorporating enough filler to reinforce the cured resin are necessary.
For example, a blend of 75% bis-GMA and 25% TEGDMA by
weight has a viscosity of about 4.3 Pa·s, whereas the viscosity of
a 50% bis-GMA/50% TEGDMA blend is about 0.2 Pa·s (similar to thin syrup). Unfortunately, these smaller, diluent monomers undergo greater polymerization shrinkage that generates
more shrinkage stress, which may cause the formation of marginal gaps and increase the risk of eventual leakage and the problems that may result, partially offsetting the advantage of using
large monomers such as bis-GMA.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What roles do the fillers play in the function and performance of dental
resins?

Filler
Incorporation of fillers, generally between 30% and 70% by volume or 50% and 85% by weight, has transformed resins into
functional materials that withstand the chemical, physical, and
mechanical challenges of the oral environment. In this section,
we will discuss the function of fillers in composites, the required
properties, and types of fillers.

Function of Fillers
Fillers can provide the following benefits:
• Reduction of polymerization shrinkage/contraction. Although
shrinkage varies from one commercial composite to another, it
typically ranges from slightly less than 1% up to about 4% by
volume.
• Reduction in thermal expansion and contraction. As the
overall expansion coefficient decreases with filler loading and
approaches that of tooth tissue, less interfacial stress is produced because of differential volumetric changes while an individual consumes hot and cold foods and beverages.
• Decreased water sorption. Absorbed water softens the resin
and makes it more prone to abrasive wear and staining.

• Reinforcement. As the volume fraction of filler approaches
approximately 70%, abrasion and fracture resistance are raised
to levels approaching those of tooth tissue, thereby increasing
both clinical performance and durability.
• Control of workability/viscosity. Filler loading, filler size, and
the range of particle sizes and shapes all markedly affect the consistency and clinical manipulation of a composite paste. Consistency
and manipulation properties determine the ease of operation,
the skill and time required, and also how reliably a cavity can be
restored free of errors and with the proper interproximal contact,
occlusal anatomy, smoothness, and appearance.
• Imparting radiopacity. Leaking margins, secondary caries,
poor proximal contacts, wear of proximal surfaces, and other
problems cannot be detected adjacent to inherently radiolucent resins. Radiopacity is most often imparted by adding
radiopaque inorganic compounds such as glass filler particles
with heavy-metal atoms, such as barium (Ba), lanthanum (La),
strontium (Sr), ytterbium (Yb), zinc (Zn), or zirconium (Zr).
For optimal diagnostic contrast, the restoration should have a
radiopacity approximately equal to that of enamel, which is
about twice that of dentin. Exceeding the radiopacity of enamel
by a large degree will have the effect of obscuring radiolucent
areas caused by gap formation or secondary caries.
• Fluoride release. Ytterbium fluoride (YbF3) and aluminofluorosilicate glass (traditionally used in glass ionomers) are able to
release fluoride from dental composites.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is there a tradeoff among workability, durability, and esthetics when
fillers are incorporated in resins?

Characteristics of Fillers
In the early versions of dental composites, quartz had been used
extensively as a filler because this material is chemically inert.
Quartz is very hard, making the composite abrasive to opposing
teeth or restorations and difficult to finish and polish to a smooth
surface. So-called amorphous silica has the same composition and
refractive index as quartz; however, silica is not crystalline and not
as hard, thus greatly reducing the abrasiveness of the composite
surface structure and improving its polishability.
The most commonly used glass filler is Ba glass. Although
Ba glass fillers also provide radiopacity, they are not as inert as
quartz or amorphous silica and are slowly leached and weakened
in acidic liquids such as citrus juices, high-pH solutions, and
other oral fluids. The glass filler is also attacked over time by
caries-protective acidulated phosphate fluoride solutions or gels.
Because of the differences in the composition of saliva among
patients, the clinical effects of exposure to saliva are difficult to
predict. However, the implication is that glass-filled composites
will gradually become more susceptible to abrasive wear, and
hence they will have a shorter functional lifetime compared with
silica-reinforced resins.
For acceptable esthetics, the translucency of a composite restoration must be similar to that of tooth structure. Thus the refractive index of the filler must closely match that of the resin. For
bis-GMA and TEGDMA, the refractive indices are approximately
1.55 and 1.46, respectively, and a mixture of the two components
in equal proportions by weight yields a refractive index of approximately 1.50. Most of the glasses and quartz used for fillers have
refractive indices of approximately 1.50, which is adequate for sufficient translucency.

CHAPTER 5

Increasing filler loading improves the most important properties discussed so far; however, there is a limit of loading. For
example, if the particle size were uniform spheres, no matter how
tightly packed the spheres are, as illustrated in the crystalline
structure shown in Chapter 2, Crystalline Structure, the maximal theoretical packing fraction for close-packed spherical structures of uniform size is approximately 74% by volume. However,
smaller particles could still be inserted among the larger spheres.
By extending this process, a continuous distribution of progressively smaller particles can yield a higher filler loading. Therefore a
distribution of particle sizes is used to maximize the volume fraction of filler in composites.
Curing of composites produces an initially smooth, resin-rich
surface, but finishing operations remove the resin matrix from the
perimeter of filler particles, exposing particles that protrude from the
surface. Particles larger than the wavelength of visible light cause light
scattering, which increases opacity and produces a visibly rough texture when the particles are exposed at the surface. A roughened surface
also tends to accumulate stains and plaque. The traditional inorganic
filler particles had average diameters of about 8 to 40 μm. Currently,
particles range from 5 nm to 2 μm. The advantage of using small
particles is that they improve esthetics (appearance) and smoothness
to the tongue (polishability). Oral wear mechanisms complement this
process, such that the ultimate smoothness that can be maintained is
highly dependent on particle size.
However, the smaller the filler particle size, the higher the surface-to-volume ratio available to form polar or hydrogen bonds
with monomer molecules to inhibit their flow and increase viscosity (resistance to mixing and manipulation). Thus less filler can
be added. Therefore there is always a tradeoff among the requirements for workability, durability, and esthetics. The clinician’s
challenge is to make an informed judgment concerning the claims
for the many products offered and to select one that is well suited
to a particular clinical application.

Types of Fillers
Various transparent mineral fillers are employed in formulating
composite resins. These include so-called “soft glass” and borosilicate “hard glass”; fused quartz; aluminum silicate; lithium aluminum silicate (beta-eucryptite, which has a negative coefficient of
thermal expansion); ytterbium fluoride; and barium, strontium,
zirconium, and zinc glasses. More discussion on the particle size
and fabrication of related fillers is provided later in the section on
the classification of composites by filler particle size.
In the quest for improved aesthetics and, hence, smaller particle sizes, two filler systems, organically modified ceramics (ormocer) and polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS), in which a
portion of the reinforcing component operates at molecular scale,
have been introduced.
Ormocer

Ormocer is an acronym for organically modified ceramics. They are
considered to be molecule-sized hybrid structures consisting of inorganic–organic copolymers. These molecular hybrids consist of, for
example, methacrylate-terminated chains grafted onto a central cyclic
polysiloxane 2- to 3-nm particle. These nanoparticles are dispersed on
a molecular scale, and high-molecular-weight, flexible, relatively lowviscosity, crosslinkable molecules (“oligomers”) result. The large spacing between crosslinks resulting from curing produces a low level of
polymerization shrinkage, and the inorganic network provides abrasion resistance through the glasslike structure and low water sorption
resulting from hydrophobicity.

Resin-Based Composites

O

O

O

O
O

O

Si
O

91

O

Si
O

Si
Si

O

O

O
O

O

O

O

O
O

O
Si

Si
O

O

Si
O

Si O
O

O
O

O

O

• Figure 5-3 Methacryl polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane, a 12-sided
silicate cage structure having polymerizable methacrylate pendant groups.
(Courtesy Hybrid Plastics, Inc., Hattiesburg, MS.)

Ormocers are used in the formulation of several commercial
composites (e.g., Definite and Admira, Voco GmbH, Cuxhaven,
Germany; Ceram-X, Dentsply International, York, PA). Whereas
the molecule-sized silicate particles provide some reinforcement,
ground glass and/or other fillers are typically required for sufficient reinforcement. Therefore ormocer is often considered as part
of the matrix of the composite. Advantages of ormocer-based dental materials include limited cure shrinkage, very high biocompatibility, good manipulation properties, and excellent esthetics.
POSS

POSS is an acronym for polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane. The
molecules are 12-sided silicate cages produced from silane and
functionalized to copolymerize with other monomers. A silsesquioxane is a chemical structure with the composition RnSinO1.5n, for
example, (CH3)8Si8O12. For the POSS materials used in dental
applications, the R-group is typically a methacrylate (Figure 5-3).
POSS is a molecule-sized hybrid organic–inorganic oligomeric
compound that can disperse homogeneously in compatible monomers and become covalently incorporated into crosslinked networks
upon curing. Like the ormocer-type materials, the silicate cage structures provide a reinforcing function, but filler particles must also be
included to achieve the balance of mechanical and other properties
required for adequate performance as dental composites. Depending
on the dispersed filler, POSS-based resins are characterized as being
highly polishable and having excellent polish retention, mechanical
properties, and wear resistance. Current commercial products based
on silsesquioxane technology include Artiste Nano-Hybrid Composite (Pentron Clinical, Wallingford, CT).

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What roles do the coupling agents play in the function and performance of
dental resins?

Coupling Agent
As stated previously, it is essential that filler particles be bonded
to the resin matrix. This allows the more flexible polymer matrix
to transfer stresses to the higher-modulus (more rigid and stiffer)

92

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

HO
H2C

Si

O
O CH3
Si O CH3
O CH
3

O

H3C

Silane coupling
agent

O

+ H

H
O

Si O
O
Si O

Silica filler
particle

Si
HO
H2O

OH
HO

O

Si

Si
O
H
Polymerizable
double bond

O

H
O

Si O
O
Si O

Silica filler
particle

+ 3 CH3OH

Si

O
HO

H2C
CH3

• Figure 5-4 The chemical structure of γ-methacryl-oxypropyltrimethoxy silane and an idealized diagram
of how a silane coupling agent is hydrolyzed and becomes attached to silica and glass filler particle surfaces. Such silanized particles are then reactive and can “couple” the particles to the resin matrix by copolymerization with the double bond in the silane propylmethacrylate group (CH2=C(CH3)COO–C3H6–Si–).
(Data taken from Söderholm K-J, Shang S-W: Molecular orientation of silane at the surface of colloidal
silica. J Dent Res 72:1050−1054, 1993.)

filler particles. The chemical bond between the two phases of the
composite is formed by a coupling agent, a difunctional surfaceactive compound that adheres to filler particle surfaces and also
coreacts with the monomer forming the resin matrix. A properly applied coupling agent can impart improved physical and
mechanical properties and inhibit leaching by preventing water
from penetrating along the filler–resin interface.
Although titanates and zirconates can be used as coupling
agents, organosilanes—such as γ-methacryloxypropyl trimethoxysilane—are used most commonly (Figure 5-4). In the presence of water, the methoxy groups (–OCH3) are hydrolyzed to
silanol (–Si–OH) groups, which can bond with other silanols on
the filler surfaces by forming siloxane bonds (–Si–O–Si–). The
organosilane methacrylate groups form covalent bonds with
the resin when the resin is polymerized, thereby completing the
coupling process. Proper coupling by means of organosilanes is
extremely important to the clinical performance of resin-based
composite restorative materials.

Inhibitors
Inhibitors are added to resin systems to minimize or prevent
spontaneous or accidental polymerization of monomers. Inhibitors have a strong reactivity potential with free radicals. If a free
radical is formed, for example, by brief exposure to room lighting
when the material is dispensed, the inhibitor reacts with the free
radical faster than the free radical can react with the monomer.
This prevents the initiation of monomers and subsequent chain
propagation. After all of the inhibitor is consumed, chain propagation can begin. A typical inhibitor is butylated hydroxytoluene
(BHT), which is used in concentrations on the order of 0.01% by
weight. Thus inhibitors have two functions: to extend the resin’s
storage life and to ensure sufficient working time.

Optical Modifiers
For a natural appearance, dental composites must have visual shading and translucency similar to the corresponding properties of
tooth structure. Shading is achieved by adding various pigments
usually consisting of minute amounts of metal oxide particles.
Translucency and opacity are adjusted as necessary to simulate
enamel and dentin. For example, if a class IV incisal area is reconstructed, the translucency of an unmodified composite might allow
too much light to pass through the restoration. As a result, less light
is reflected or scattered back to the observer, who perceives the incisal edge as too dark. This deficiency can be corrected by adding an
opacifier. However, if an excessive amount of opacifier is added, too
much light may be reflected, and the observer then perceives that
the restoration is “too white,” or more correctly, “too high in value”
(Chapter 3, Three Dimensions of Color). To increase the opacity,
the manufacturer adds titanium dioxide and aluminum oxide to
composites in minute amounts (0.001% to 0.007% by weight).
All optical modifiers affect light transmission through a composite. Thus darker shades and greater opacities have a decreased depth
of light-curing ability and require either an increased exposure time
or a thinner layer when cured. Studies have shown that for optimal
polymerization, resins with darker shades and opacifiers should be
placed in thinner layers. This consideration has added importance
when a bonding agent covered by a composite layer is being cured.

Classification of Dental Composites
As the variety of dental composites increases in response to new innovations and needs, there are also several ways of classifying dental
composites, depending on various aspects of the composites. A useful
classification system for composites is one based on filler particle size
and size distribution, as shown in Table 5-1. Dental composites can

CHAPTER 5

TABLE 5-1

Resin-Based Composites

93

Classification of Resin-Based Composites and Indications for Use

Class of Composite

Particle Size and/or Unique Aspects of Filler
Content

Clinical Use

Traditional (large particle, macrofill)

8- to 40-μm glass or silica

High-stress areas

Homogeneous microfill

40-nm silica

Low-stress and subgingival areas that require a
high luster and polish

Heterogeneous microfill (microfilled)

(1) 40-nm silica
(2) larger prepolymerized organic resin particles
containing 10–100 nm silica

Low-stress and subgingival areas where reduced
shrinkage is essential

Nanofill

<100-nm silica or zirconia
Homogeneous independent nanoparticles or
nanoclusters

Anterior and noncontact posterior areas

Hybrid (large particle)

(1) 1- to 20-μm glass
(2) 40-nm silica

High-stress areas requiring improved polishability
(classes I–IV)

Hybrid (midfiller)

(1) 0.1- to 10-μm glass
(2) 40-nm silica

High-stress areas requiring improved polishability
(classes III, IV)

Hybrid (minifiller/SPF*)

(1) 0.1- to 2-μm glass
(2) 40-nm silica

Moderate-stress areas requiring optimal polishability
(classes III, IV)

Nanohybrid

(1) 0.1- to 2-μm glass or resin microparticles
(2) ≤100-nm nanoparticles

Moderate-stress areas requiring optimal polishability
(classes III, IV)

Flowable/Injectable

Commercial composites made flowable, usually
by lowering filler loading

Situations where improved flow is needed (e.g., a
cavity base or liner, a sealant) or where access is
difficult (class II)

Packable/Condensable

Increased loading of midfiller/minifiller hybrid with
macrofillers; elongated, fibrous filler (100 μm in
length); and/or rough branched fillers

Situations where improved condensability is needed
(classes I, II)

Bulk fill

Usually nanohybrids but also involves very high
filler loadings to reduce polymerization shrinkage
and/or stress. The refractive indices of the filler
and monomer are also matched to increase
composite translucency to allow increased light
penetration and allow polymerization at greater
depths.

Large posterior cavity preparations > 4 mm in depth

Universal

Usually nanohybrids but could be nanofills (or
nanofills with prepolymerized particles)

Classes I–V

SPF, small-particle filled.

also be classified based on curing method, manipulation characteristics, application, unique characteristics, and any combination of
these, as discussed in the following sections.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the similarities and differences in the mechanisms involved in
chemical-activated and light-activated dental resins?

Classification by Curing Method
Methacrylate-functionalized monomers polymerize by the addition polymerization mechanism (also known as chain-growth
polymerization) initiated by free radicals. Free radicals can be generated by chemical activation or by external energy activation
(heat, light, or microwave). Because dental composites for direct
placement use chemical activation, light activation, or a combination of the two, only these systems are discussed here.

Chemical-Activated (Self-Cured) Resins
Chemical-activated resins are supplied as two pastes, one of which
contains the benzoyl peroxide initiator, and the other contains
monomers and an aromatic tertiary amine activator (e.g., N,Ndimethyl-p-toluidine). When the two pastes are mixed together, the
amine activates the benzoyl peroxide to form free radicals, and addition polymerization is initiated. There are inherent limitations with
chemical activation. First, air is incorporated during mixing, leading
to the formation of pores that weaken the structure and trap oxygen,
which inhibits polymerization on the inner surfaces of the pores.
Second, the operator has no control over the working time
after the two components have been mixed. Therefore both insertion and contouring must be completed quickly once the resin
components are mixed. Thus today, they are mainly used for restorations and large foundation structures (buildups) that are not
readily cured with a light source.
Third, the reactivity of oxygen to a radical is much higher
than that of a monomer inhibiting polymerization on the

94

PA RT I I

• Box 5-1

Direct Restorative Materials

Advantages and Disadvantages of
Chemical-Activated (Self-Cured) Resins

• Box 5-2

Advantages and Disadvantages of LightActivated (Light-Cured) Resins

Advantages

Advantages

Convenience and simplicity: no equipment needed, hazard-free
Long-term storage stability
Manipulation of working/setting time by varying proportions
Degree of cure equal throughout material if mixed properly
Marginal stress buildup during curing is much lower than for light-cured
resins because of relatively slower rates of crosslink formation.

No mixing needed, thus low porosity, less staining, stronger
No aromatic amine accelerator, thus greatly improved color stability
“Command” setting (upon exposure to an intense blue light). This means
that working time is controlled, at will, by the clinician.
Small increments of composite can be polymerized at a time, allowing the
use of multiple shades within a single restoration and accommodating
for shrinkage within each increment as opposed to bulk shrinkage.

Disadvantages
Mixing causes air entrapment, leading to porosity that weakens the material
and increases susceptibility to staining. This has been reduced by the
use of mixing syringes.
Aromatic amine accelerators oxidize and turn yellow with time (i.e., color
instability).
Difficult to mix evenly, causing unequal degree of cure and, consequently,
poor mechanical properties

surface. During the inhibition period, this oxygen diffuses into
the resin and is consumed by the radicals formed. This reaction
forms an oxygen-inhibited layer. The thickness of the oxygeninhibited layer is dependent on the viscosity of the resin, the
solubility of oxygen in the monomer, and the initiating system
used.
Fourth, self-cured resins tend to have initial yellow off-color
and lower color stability as a result of the aromatic amine. This is
another reason self-cured resins are not used as direct restorations.
Box 5-1 lists the advantages and disadvantages of chemicalactivated resins.

Light-Activated (Light-Cured) Resins
To overcome the problems associated with chemical activation,
systems using a photosensitive initiator system and a light source
for activation were developed. The first light-activated systems
were formulated for UV light, which has been replaced by visible blue-light–activated systems, with great improvements in the
quality of the cured composites (Box 5-2). Light-curable dental
composites are supplied as a single paste contained in a lightproof
syringe or capsule because there is no chemical activator in the
material. The free radical–initiating system, consisting of a photosensitizer and an amine co-initiator, is contained in this paste.
As long as these two components are not exposed to light, they
do not interact. However, exposure to light in the blue region
(wavelength of about 468 nm) produces an excited state of the
photosensitizer, which then interacts with the amine to form
free radicals that initiate addition polymerization (Figure 5-5).
Camphorquinone (CQ) is a commonly used photosensitizer that
absorbs blue light with wavelengths between 400 and 500 nm.
Only small quantities of CQ are required (0.2% by weight or
less in the paste). A number of amine initiators are suitable for
interaction with CQ, such as dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate
(DMAEMA), which is also present at low levels of about 0.15%
by weight.
In addition to avoiding the porosity of chemical-activated resins, light-activated materials allow the operator to complete insertion and contouring before curing is initiated. Furthermore, once
curing is initiated, an exposure time of 40 s or less is required to
light-cure a 2-mm-thick layer, compared with several minutes for

Disadvantages
Limited cure depth: necessary to build up in layers of about 2 mm
The marginal stress buildup during curing is much higher than in self-cured
resins. This is a result of faster crosslinking, and thus reduced time for
chains to slide among themselves and relax interfacial stress buildup
resulting from cure shrinkage.
Mildly sensitive to normal room illumination (thus, a crust will form when
exposed too long to an examination light)
A special lamp is needed to initiate curing.
Poor lamp accessibility in posterior and interproximal areas; requires extra
exposure time and care in placement and maintaining lamp tip angle
and distance for optimal results
Darker shades require longer exposure times.
Cure is affected by additives such as ultraviolet absorbers for color
stabilization, fluorescent dyes for clinical aesthetics, or excessive
inhibitor concentration. They all absorb light or prevent reaction.
Problems with lamps include the following:
Glare is harmful to clinic personnel; use protective glasses or filters.
Except for light-emitting diode (LED) lamps, curing light generates
substantial heat and will cause pain at 2 to 3 mm in about 20 sec.
Quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH) bulbs dim with age; therefore, use
proper instrumentation to monitor output irradiance.
The lamp wavelength must be matched with the resin photoinitiation system.
The irradiance of the light decreases with distance to the log scale.
The curing angle is critical; maximal irradiance is delivered
perpendicular (90°) to the resin surface.
Training is required to develop best-practice techniques for optimum
intraoral exposure to maximize the degree of cure.
Incomplete curing owing to the previously described problems with lamps.

self-cured materials. Finally, light-cured systems are not as sensitive to oxygen inhibition as are the self-cured systems. Because
of these advantages, visible light−activated composites are more
widely used than chemical-activated materials.
However, light-cured composites have inherent limitations.
For example, they must be placed incrementally when the bulk
exceeds approximately 2 to 3 mm because of the limited depth
of light penetration. Thus light-cured composites can actually
require more time when making large restorations (e.g., in class II
cavity preparations). The depth of cure has been raised to at least
4 mm with the development of bulk-fill composites (see Bulk-Fill
Composites section). Other issues are related to the light-curing
unit and are discussed in three areas: the curing lamps, the depth
of cure, and the safety precautions for using lamps.
Box 5-2 lists the advantages and disadvantages of lightactivated resins.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the tradeoffs among the several types of light sources used to
photoactivate dental restorative resins?

CHAPTER 5

Resin-Based Composites

95

Blue light
468 nm

Photo-excitation
Camphorquinone in
excited “triplet” state
(CQ*)
Camphorquinone (CQ)

2 DMAEMA

Complexation

1. CQ abstracts an H-atom
from the −CH2 − in the amine
2. Complex breaks down
into free radicals

“Exciplex”
Photo-excited complex
(DMAEMA:)2CQ*

Free radicals are derived from both
the amine and camphorquinone
(2 DMAEMA• and •CQ•)

• Figure 5-5 The light-cured process is activated when a diketone photosensitizer, such as camphorquinone (CQ) absorbs a quantum of blue light and forms an excited-state complex (exciplex) with an electron
donor such as an amine (e.g., dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate). In the gure, “••” denotes the unshared
pair of electrons “donated” by the amines to the > C = O (ketone) groups in CQ. While in this activated
complex, CQ extracts a hydrogen atom from the α-carbon adjacent to the amine group, and the complex
decomposes into amine and CQ free radicals. The CQ free radical is readily inactivated. Thus in photoinitiation, only the amine free radicals act to initiate the addition polymerization reaction.

Curing Lamps

The two main types of lamps currently used for photoinitiation of
the polymerization process are quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH)
lamps and LED lamps, with LED lamps quickly overtaking QTH
lamps in popularity.
QTH or halogen lamps have a quartz bulb with a tungsten
filament that irradiates both UV and white light, which must
be filtered to remove heat and all wavelengths except those in
the violet-blue range (about 400 to 500 nm) to match the photoabsorption range of CQ. The irradiance of the bulb (200 to
400 mW/cm2) diminishes with use, so a calibration meter is
required to measure the irradiance.
LED lamps use a solid-state electronic process to emit radiation
only in the blue part of the visible spectrum, between 440 and 480 nm,

and do not require filters. LEDs require low wattage, can be batterypowered and cordless, generate very little heat, and are quiet
because no cooling fan is needed. Initially, they produced similar
irradiance as QTH lamps (200 to 400 mW/cm2), but the latest
versions are more intense and use two or more LED units to both
increase irradiance (>1000 mW/m2) and extend the wavelength
range. As such, significantly less time is needed to cure the composite using LED lamps. Their light bulbs are also cheaper to replace
(up to a third of the price of QTH light bulbs) and more reliable.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the benefits and drawbacks of increasing the irradiance of curing
lamps?

96

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Polymerization is initiated when a critical concentration of free
radicals is formed. This requires that a particular number of photons be absorbed by the initiator system, which is directly related
to the wavelength, irradiance, and time of exposure. For maximum
curing, a radiant energy influx of approximately 16 J/cm2 is
required for a 2-mm-thick layer of resin. This can be delivered by a
40-s exposure to a lamp emitting 400 mW/cm2 (40 s × 400 mW/
cm2 = 16,000 mJ/cm2 or 16 J/cm2). By the law of reciprocity, the
same result can be produced by a 20-s exposure at 800 mW/cm2 or
an exposure of about 13 s with a 1200-mW/cm2 lamp. Thus
increasing the irradiance of the lamp increases the rate and degree
of cure. However, research studies have shown that a longer-thancalculated time might be needed when higher-irradiance light is
used. In addition, faster curing with higher-irradiance light sources
can increase shrinkage stress, as discussed in the following section.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
How does lamp irradiance affect the depth of cure?
What are the most important factors that affect the depth of cure for a lamp
with a given irradiance?

Depth of Cure and Exposure Time

LED lamps with substantially increased irradiances (>1000 mW/
cm2) have opened the possibility of reduced exposure times with
a greater depth of cure. However, with conventional composites,
light absorption and scattering in resin composites reduce the irradiance and DC exponentially with the depth of penetration. Irradiance can be reduced by a factor of 10 to 100 in a 2-mm-thick
layer of composite. This reduces monomer conversion to an unacceptable level at depths greater than 2 to 3 mm. Thus the surface
must be irradiated for a longer time to deliver sufficient energy
well below the surface. Given the limits imposed by the light
scattering and absorption inherent in current restorative resins, the
tradeoffs are such that increased irradiance will allow either shorter
curing times for a given depth of cure or an increased depth of cure
for a given exposure time, but there is little advantage in attempting to achieve both simultaneously. The practical consequence is
that the curing depth is limited to 2 to 3 mm unless excessively
long exposure times are used, regardless of lamp irradiance.
Light attenuation can also vary considerably from one type of
composite to another, depending, for example, on the opacity,
filler size, filler concentration, and pigment shade (i.e., darker
shades and/or more opaque resins require longer curing times).
For these reasons, manufacturers usually recommend curing
times based on a particular curing device for each shade and type
of resin. These recommended times are typically the absolute
minimum required. To maximize both the degree of polymerization and the long-term clinical durability, the clinician should
adjust the exposure time and curing technique to the irradiance
of the light source used. Light is also absorbed and scattered as it
passes through tooth structure, especially dentin, thereby causing
incomplete curing in such critical areas as proximal boxes. Therefore, when one attempts to polymerize the resin through tooth
structure, the exposure time should be increased by a factor of 2
to 3 to compensate for the reduction in light irradiance.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the critical exposure techniques and lamp-maintenance practices
required for optimal curing and ensuring maximal longevity of resin-based
composite restorations?

For the halogen (QTH) lamps, light irradiance is particularly
susceptible to aging of the light source. For all types, faulty orientation of the light tip and too great of a distance between the light
tip and restoration will reduce light output. Several surveys have
shown that the curing units in many dental offices worldwide do
not deliver an adequate light output. The bulbs, LEDs, reflectors,
and internal filters in dental light-curing units of all types have
been shown to degrade with use. In addition, autoclaving, the use
of disinfectant chemicals, or restorative material adhering to the
light tip can dramatically reduce light output.
Consequently, the lamp’s output irradiance should be checked
regularly, and the operator should always place the light tip as
close as possible perpendicular to the restorative material and
maintain this distance and orientation throughout the exposure
time. Studies reported in 2010 and 2011 by Price and colleagues
concluded that specialized training in these technique-related
details substantially improves the intraoral degree of monomerto-polymer conversion that is obtained.
Safety Precautions for Using Curing Lamps

The light emitted by curing units can cause retinal damage if a
person looks directly at the beam. Thus never look directly into
the light tip and minimize observation of the reflected light for
longer periods. Protective eyeglasses and various types of shields
that filter the light are available for increased protection for both
clinical personnel and patients.

Dual-Cured Resins
One way to overcome the limits on curing depth and some of the
other problems associated with light curing is to combine chemical-curing and light-curing components in the same resin. Dualcured resins consist of two light-curable pastes, one containing
benzoyl peroxide and the other containing an aromatic tertiary
amine accelerator. They are formulated to cure very slowly when
mixed for the self-cured mechanism. The curing process is then
accelerated on “command” via light curing. The chief advantage of
this system is assurance of completion of cure throughout, even if
light curing is inadequate. The major disadvantage is the porosity
caused by the required mixing, but this has been greatly alleviated by the use of mixing syringes. There is also less color stability
than with the light-cured resins as a result of the aromatic amine
accelerators, but this is still better than the self-cured systems
because the concentration of the accelerators is reduced compared
with self-cured resins. Finally, as with the self-cured resins, oxygen inhibition and porosity are problems with dual-cured resins.
Dual-cured materials are intended for any situation that does not
allow sufficient light penetration to produce adequate monomer
conversion—for example, cementation of bulky ceramic inlays.
This technology has been incorporated into direct composites to
develop bulk-fill composites with unlimited depth of cure. Examples include Parkell HyperFil, Apex Injectafil DC, and Coltene
Fill-Up!.

Classification by Filler Particle Size
The classification of fillers by particle size is shown in Table 5-2.
In conjunction with the chronology of dental composite developments shown in Figure 5-1, it can be seen that the distribution and
average size of filler particles played a major role in the advancement of dental composites. As such, a classification of dental composites based on the filler particle size can be used (Table 5-1).

CHAPTER 5

Traditional/Large-Particle/Macrofill Composites
These are the traditional composites with glass or silica macrofiller
particles in the size range of between 8 to 40 μm (Figure 5-6).
Because of their large particle size, these composites have lower
relative viscosity and are easier to fill at higher loadings than
microfills and nanofills. As such, they tend to be stronger and can
be used in high-stress areas. However, the visibly rough texture
after polishing, caused by the exposure of larger particles, has
made this category of dental composite obsolete.

Resin-Based Composites

97

Class of Filler

Particle Size

Macrofillers

10–100 μm

Midfillers

1–10 μm

Small/fine fillers

0.1–10 μm

Minifillers

0.1–1 μm

Homogeneous Microfill Composites
The solution to rough surfaces and an opaque appearance was
the homogeneous microfill composites, which used filler particles
with a mean diameter much smaller than the wavelength of visible
light. Such fillers are made by a pyrolytic precipitation process
where a silicon compound such as SiCl4 is burned in an oxygen/
hydrogen atmosphere to form macromolecular chains of colloidal
silica (see Figure 5-7), resulting in amorphous silica with an average
size of 40 nm.
However, these particles, because of their extremely small size,
have extremely large surface areas ranging from 50 to 400 m2/g. In
addition, the pyrolytic process results in particle “agglomeration”
into long, molecular-scale chains (Figures 5-8 and 5-9). These
nondiscrete, 3-D, chainlike networks drastically increase monomer viscosity and make clinical manipulation difficult. Thus filler
incorporation at high enough loading to adequately reinforce the
resin is difficult. In fact, when incorporated directly in “homogeneous” microfill composites, only about 2% by weight produces a
stiff paste that is much too viscous for clinical manipulation
(Figure 5-10). They are often just called microfill composite.

Microfillers

0.01–0.1 μm (agglomerated)

CRITICAL QUESTIONS

Nanofillers

0.005–0.1 μm*

Why is the polymerization shrinkage of microfilled (heterogeneous microfill)
composites not higher than that of conventional composites even though the
inorganic filler loading in microfill is substantially lower?

TABLE 5-2

Classification of Reinforcing Filler
Particles by Size Range

*5–100 nm, nonagglomerated.

Microfilled (Heterogeneous Microfill) Composites
To increase the inorganic filler loading of microfill composites, a
resin-based filler loaded with 10- to 100-nm inorganic colloidal
silica is used instead. These resin-based, heterogeneous fillers are
made by incorporating about 50 vol% of silane-treated colloidal
silica microfiller into the monomer at a slightly elevated temperature to lower the viscosity and by using large industrial machines
capable of mixing high-viscosity blends. The mixture is cured, and
then pulverized to make a filled resin powder consisting of 5- to
50-μm particles. These amorphous colloidal silica-containing particles are then used as an “organic” filler, which is incorporated into
the monomer with additional silane-treated colloidal silica to form
a workable paste. In this way, the overall inorganic filler content of
the final, cured composite is increased to about 50% by weight.
However, if the composite particles are counted as filler particles,
the filler content is closer to 80% by weight (approximately 60%
by volume). A diagram representing the preparation of the filler in
microfilled resins of this type is shown in Figure 5-11. This class of
material is called heterogeneous microfill or microfilled composite.
• Figure 5-6 Ground quartz filler particles with diameters of about
1 to 30 μm. Such relatively large fillers were used in early formulations
of traditional composites. The smaller particles seen in the background
contribute to a broad particle-size distribution. (Courtesy Dr. Karl-Johan
Söderholm.)

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Which properties of microfilled resins are generally inferior to those of other
resin-based composite materials, and what are the clinical implications of
these deficiencies?

Heat

• Figure 5-7 Pyrogenic reaction showing the initial formation of fumed silica particles in the 40-nm size
range, as used in microfill resins. (Courtesy Dr. Karl-Johan Söderholm.)

98

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

100

Viscosity/kPa.s

10

Close-packed
spheres limit
1

Large glass beads
Small glass beads
Powdered quartz
0.1
0.1

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Volume fraction filler

• Figure 5-8 Transmission electron microscope image of fumed silica particles produced by the pyrogenic reaction shown in Figure 5-7. The particle diameters average approximately 40 nm. (Courtesy Dr. Karl-Johan Söderholm.)

• Figure 5-10 The effect of filler specific surface area on the viscosity
(log scale) of the uncured resin matrix. The smaller the particle, the larger
is the surface area and the greater the viscosity buildup. (Adapted from
Darvell BW: Materials Science for Dentistry, ed 10, Cambridge, UK, 2018,
Woodhead Publishing Ltd.)

Cure

+ Liquid
monomer

Powder

SiO2 particles
(~0.04 microns)

Pulverize

Solid resin

Resin filler particles
(5-50 microns)

• Figure 5-9 The pyrogenic silica used in microfill composites has a very
large total surface area because of its extremely small average particle
size of about 0.04 μm/40 nm. These particles agglomerate and form
long chains, as seen in this transmission electron micrograph. (Courtesy
Dr. Karl-Johan Söderholm.)

Whereas microfilled composites are among the more highly
polishable restorative composites, their physical and mechanical properties are generally inferior to those of traditional composites. This is to be expected because 40% to 80% by volume
of the restorative material is made up of resin, resulting in

• Figure 5-11 Preparation of resin filler particles for use in microfilled composites. The filler particles in a microfilled composite consist of pulverized
“composite filler particles” dispersed in a cured resin matrix. Pyrogenic colloidal silica particles of about 0.04 μm (about 40 nm) are incorporated into
both the precured resin filler particles and the curable monomer, with the
precured resin containing a substantially higher concentration. (Modified from
Lambrechts P: Basic Properties of Dental Composites and Their Impact on
Clinical Performance. Thesis. Leuven, Belgium, Katholieke University, 1983.)

greater water sorption, a higher coefficient of thermal expansion, and decreased elastic modulus. In addition, the weak
bond of the prepolymerized particles to the clinically cured
resin matrix results in decreased tensile strength, similar to that
of composites with nonsilanized filler particles. Table 5-3
shows various properties of different types of composites for
reference.

CHAPTER 5

TABLE 5-3

99

Resin-Based Composites

Properties of Composite Restorative Materials

Characteristic/
Property

Unfilled
Acrylic

Traditional

Hybrid (Small
Particle)

Hybrid (AllPurpose)

Microfilled

Flowable
Hybrid

Packable
Hybrid

Enamel

Dentin

Size (μm)

—

8–12

0.5–3

0.4–1.0

0.04–0.4

0.6–1.0

Fibrous

—

—

Inorganic filler
(vol%)

0

60–70

65–77

60–65

20–59

30–55

48–67

Inorganic filler
(wt%)

0

70–80

80–90

75–80

35–67

40–60

65–81

—

—

Compressive
strength (MPa)

70

250–300

350–400

300–350

250–350

—

—

384

297

Tensile strength
(MPa)

24

50–65

75–90

40–50

30–50

—

40–45

10

52

Elastic modulus
(GPa)

2.4

8–15

15–20

11–15

3–6

4–8

3–13

84

18

Thermal expansion
coefficient (ppm/°C)

92.8

25–35

19–26

30–40

50–60

—

—

—

—

Water sorption
(mg/cm2)

1.7

0.5–0.7

0.5–0.6

0.5–0.7

1.4–1.7

—

—

—

—

Knoop hardness
(KHN)

15

55

50–60

50–60

25–35

—

—

350–430

68

Curing shrinkage
(vol%)

8–10

—

2–3

2–3

2–3

3–5

2–3

—

—

Radiopacity (mm
of Al)

0.1

2–3

2–3

2–4

0.5–2

1–4

2–3

2

1

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What features of microfilled resins make them the material of choice for
certain types of restorations?
Which types of restorations are produced ideally from microfilled composites?

In the longer term, if microfilled composites are placed in wearprone areas, they eventually break down and wear at a rate too fast
for acceptable clinical performance. If placed in areas of proximal
contact, anterior tooth “drifting” may occur. The wear process
has also been related to fracture propagation around the poorly
bonded “organic” filler particles (Figure 5-12). Thus diamond
burs, rather than fluted tungsten-carbide burs, are recommended
for trimming microfilled composites so as to minimize the risk
of chipping. Microfilled composites are the resins of choice for
restoring teeth with carious lesions in smooth surfaces (classes III
and V) but not in stress-bearing situations (classes II and IV).

Nanofill Composites/Nanocomposites
More recently, nanoparticles (1 to 100 nm) have been fabricated
by a different method from the pyrolytic precipitation process used
for colloidal silica. This allows the individual, primary particles to
be surface-coated (with γ-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane, for
example) prior to becoming incorporated into 3-D macromolecule
chains, thereby preventing or limiting particle agglomeration into
large networks and driving up viscosity. In essence, the particle size
is similar to that in homogeneous microfill composites, but the difference is that the particles in homogeneous microfill composites
are in three-dimensional agglomerates or networks that increase

• Figure 5-12 Fractured microfilled composite. The fractured surface
shows that the organic filler (composite filler) particles have been plucked
out of the matrix resin, suggesting adhesive failure resulting from a weak
interface between the precured microfill particles and the resin matrix.
(Courtesy Dr. Karl-Johan Söderholm.)

viscosity, whereas those in nanofill composites are mostly discrete
and have a minimal effect on viscosity. Thus these composites have
optical properties and superior polishability like those of homogeneous microfill composites, but the surface treatment lowers the
increase in viscosity when incorporated into the monomer, which

100

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

allows an increased filler loading of upward of 60% by volume and
78% by weight. Filler loading in this range is expected to lead to the
necessary mechanical properties for use in posterior, stress-bearing
restorations, but these properties have not yet been confirmed.
One of the reasons that increased mechanical properties are
not observed is that no commercial products have as yet been
reported to contain only isolated, discrete, homogeneously dispersed nanoparticles as the sole filler component. In fact, few if
any dental resins currently designated as nanocomposites meet
the strict requirement of having essentially all filler particles of
less than 100 nm. This is because some of the nanoparticles exist
as loosely bound “clusters” (loose agglomerates, such as in Filtek
Supreme, 3M ESPE) of primary nanoparticles, which are sometimes reported to extend into the micron size range (e.g., 60 nm to
1.4 μm). Above 100 nm, clusters, like any particles, begin to scatter
visible light and thereby reduce the translucency and the depth of
cure of the composite. In addition, these clusters are not chemically
bound to each other and act to decrease mechanical properties.
Thus, although these nanocomposites with clusters have increased
filler loading and hence better mechanical properties than a true
homogeneous nanocomposite, they are not as strong as a hybrid
composite.
To combat this deficiency, larger particles of either finely
ground glass or prepolymerized nanoparticle-filled resin organic
filler particles (essentially the same as those found in the microfilled composites) are combined with the monomer-dispersed
nanoparticles. Thus most, if not all, of these products are more
accurately designated as “hybrid” nanocomposites or nanohybrids,
consisting of a blend of two or more size ranges of filler particles,
one or more of which is in the nanoparticle range (Table 5-1).

CRITICAL QUESTION

• Figure 5-13 A class IV restoration made with a hybrid composite. A,

What are the relationships and tradeoffs among particle size, composition,
and percentage of filler relative to their effect on the manipulation
consistency, polishability, radiopacity, durability, and appearance of resinbased composite materials?

Fractured maxillary central incisor prior to restoration. B, After restoration
with a hybrid composite. (Courtesy Dr. William Rose.)

Hybrid (Large-Particle, Midfiller, Minifiller, Nanohybrid)
Composites
As the name implies, hybrid composites are formulated with mixed
filler systems containing large-particle, midfiller, minifiller, microfine, and/or nanofiller particles in an effort to obtain even better
surface smoothness than that provided by the small-particle composites, while still maintaining the desirable mechanical properties
of the small-particle composites. Thus they are a general utility class
of composite that are also suitable for restoring certain high-stress
sites where esthetic considerations dominate—for example, incisal
edges and small noncontact occlusal cavities. They are widely used
for anterior restorations, including class IV sites (Figure 5-13). Most
commercial hybrid composites are marketed as nanohybrids because
they are supposed to contain discrete nanofillers, but whether that is
true or not, any hybrid could be marketed as a nanohybrid because
hybrids contain nanoparticles. Thus checking whether the nanoparticles are discrete in aggregates or in clusters is important.
Most modern hybrid fillers consist of colloidal silica and
ground particles of glasses containing heavy metals constituting
a filler content of approximately 75% to 80% by weight. The
glasses have an average particle size of about 0.4 to 1.0 μm, with
a trend to steadily reduce this size range as improvements are
made. In a typical size distribution, 75% of the ground particles
are smaller than 1.0 μm, and colloidal silica represents 10% to

20% by weight of the total filler content. The smaller microfiller
sizes increase the surface area, which generally increases the viscosity and requires a decrease in overall filler loading compared
with small-particle composites. A polished surface is shown in
Figure 5-14.

Classification of Composites by Manipulation
Characteristics
There are three distinct classes of composite materials based on the
flow characteristics of the composite materials during the placement: flowable, condensable, and bulk fill.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the key modifications in formulation to make composites flowable?

Flowable/Injectable Composites
A modification of available composites resulted in the so-called
flowable or injectable composites, which have become popular
since 1995. These resins typically have a lower viscosity through a
reduced filler loading, which enables the resin to flow readily,
spread uniformly, intimately adapt to a cavity form, and produce
the desired dental anatomy. This improves the clinician’s ability to
form a well-adapted cavity base or liner, especially in class II

CHAPTER 5

• Figure 5-14 Polished surface of a hybrid composite similar to those
shown in Figures 5-12 and 5-14. Particle sizes range from about 0.1
to 3 μm (scanning electron microscope [SEM] magnification ×5000).
(Courtesy Dr. Robert L. Erickson.)

posterior preparations and other situations in which access is difficult. However, they are inherently inferior in mechanical properties because of the lower filler loading and higher susceptibility to
wear and other forms of attrition. Because of their greater ease of
adaptation and flexibility as a cured material, flowable composites
are also useful in class V restorations in gingival areas and as the
first base layer below a filling. They may also be applied in a manner similar to the use of fissure sealants as minimal class I restorations to prevent caries. Because they can flow into small crevice
defects along restoration margins, some dentists refer to flowable
resins as “dental caulk.”

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the key modifications in formulation to make composites packable?

Condensable/Packable Composites
Compared with amalgam, the technique of composite placement
is far more time-consuming and demanding. Because of their
highly plastic, paste-like consistency in the precured state, composites cannot be packed vertically into a cavity in such a way that
the material flows laterally and vertically to ensure intimate contact with the cavity walls. In particular, in the restoration of a tooth
in which proximal contact with the adjacent tooth is required, the
paste consistency of most composites dictates that a matrix band
be carefully contoured and wedged to obtain acceptable proximal
contact. These are tedious, time-consuming procedures and can
produce variable results without a high level of skill. Thus condensable composites (also known as packable composites) were developed
by adjusting their filler distribution to increase the filler loading
and, hence, the strength and stiffness of the uncured material, and
provide consistency and handling characteristics similar to those
of lathe-cut amalgam. Note that the term condensable is misleading because unlike amalgam, where the material is condensed to
“squeeze” out mercury to pack the amalgam alloy particles better
and produce stronger restoration, the filler particles in composites
are not packed more, and the resin is not “squeezed” out. Thus
packable is a more accurate term for this type of composite.
In addition, the packable characteristics are derived from the
inclusion of elongated, fibrous filler particles of about 100 μm in

Resin-Based Composites

101

length and/or rough-textured surfaces or branched geometries that
tend to interlock and resist flow. This causes the uncured resin to
be firm and resistant to slumping yet moldable under the force of
condensers (“pluggers”). In certain products, larger-than-average
filler particles (15 to 80 μm) are used, and the resin matrix is modified chemically to allow a slight increase in filler content over
hybrids. Some have the same filler particles as their companion
hybrids from the same manufacturer; the only difference is that
the resin matrix is adjusted to allow approximately 1% to 2% of
additional filler loading. However, many of the limitations of resin
composites still prevail, and approximately twice the time required
for amalgam placement is needed. At present, these materials have
not demonstrated any advantageous properties or characteristics
over the hybrid composites other than being somewhat similar to
amalgam in their placement technique. Despite manufacturers’
claims to the contrary, conventional packable composites have not
yet proven to be an answer to the general need for wear-resistant,
easily placed posterior resins with low curing shrinkage and a
depth of cure greater than 2 mm. A clinical study by van Dijkn
and Sunnegårdh-Grönberg reported that 6-year survival rates of
two packable composites, Nulite F (Nulite Systems International)
and Alert (Pentron), were 75% and 87%, respectively, and that the
incorporation of fibers create very rough surface characteristics.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the key modifications in formulation to make composites bulkcurable?

Bulk-Fill Composites
Two main disadvantages of light-cured composites are the need
of placing in 2-mm increments and the marginal gap formation
resulting from polymerization shrinkage stress. Although 2-mm
buildup reduces polymerization shrinkage stresses, this is very
time-consuming for the clinician.
To address these shortcomings, bulk-fill composites that have a
minimum of 4-mm depth of cure were introduced. This advancement has been made possible via the use of a combination of lowshrinkage monomers and greater translucency of the composite
by better matching of refractive indices between the filler and
resin. Other advancements include additional photoinitiators to
enhance light curing (Ivoclar Vivadent EvoCeram Bulk Fill with
Ivoceran) and/or the use of dual-cured initiator systems that allow
for unlimited depth of cure (Parkell HyperFil, Apex Injectafil DC,
and Coltene Fill-Up!).
Bulk-fill composites typically have good mechanical properties
within the range of universal composites (transverse strength ∼120
to 160 MPa and elastic modulus ∼10 GPa), with very low shrinkage (<2% volumetrically). One study reported that despite being
placed in a 4-mm layer, SDR Flow (Dentsply) performed just as
well clinically as a nanohybrid placed in 2-mm layers after 5 years.
Because of the use of an amine-based activator, dual-cured
bulk-fill composites are expected to have poorer initial color and
color stability. Also, some studies have shown that only a few bulkfill composites had volumetric shrinkages <2%, and that shrinkages may be more in the range between 1.7% and 3.5%. Finally,
volumetric shrinkages are not well correlated to the production of
shrinkage stress because shrinkage stress is not a material property,
and various factors, such as rate of polymerization and composite
modulus, affect shrinkage stress. In fact, the method of shrinkagestress measurement strongly affects the measured stress values and
sometimes, even sample ranking. Thus, although shrinkage stress

102

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

may be more important than volumetric shrinkage in predicting
composite longevity, using this parameter to compare products is
more difficult, and relative rankings would need to be used instead.
Bulk-fill composites may be too translucent to be esthetic. To
address this concern, monomers that change in refractive index as
they polymerize have been used so that this will match with the
filler’s refractive index before curing to allow deep light penetration. However, as the cure progresses, the composite will become
opaquer and achieve a better match with the surrounding tooth
structure. Examples include 3M Filtek One Bulk Fill Smart Contrast Ratio Management system and Ivoclar Tetric EvoCeram Bulk
Fill Aessencio Technology.
The most recent advancement in bulk-fill composites is the
introduction of bulk-fill flowable composites. Most of these products are recommended as the first layer of a restoration like conventional flowable composites, except this time, the first layer
could be 4 mm (e.g., 3M Bulk Fill Flowable and Ivoclar Vivadent
EvoFlow Bulk Fill). Thus only a second top esthetic layer is needed
to complete the restoration, and often the corresponding bulk-fill
composites from the same company are recommended with these
bulk-fill flowables. The methods in making these bulk-curable are
similar to those in regular bulk-fill composites, except the filler
loading tends to be significantly lower to decrease viscosity (64 to
73 wt% vs. 77 to 87 wt% in conventional bulk-fill composites),
and thixotropic properties are used to make these composites
injectable. Despite that, transverse strengths are still in the range
of regular bulk-fill composites (120 to 173 MPa), but the elastic
modulus is lower, with some products having a deliberately lower
modulus to reduce polymerization shrinkage stress (1.1 to 2.1 MPa)
despite having higher volumetric shrinkage (2.5% to 3.5%).
Examples include 3M Bulk Fill Flowable and Shofu Beautifil Bulk
Flowable. A lower elastic modulus means the material is not as
stiff, and hence, some polymerization stress is relieved.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What is the strategy of formulation that allows universal composites to be
used in class I through V restorations?

Classification of Composites by Clinical Use
Filler particle size has predominantly determined the clinical use
of the composite. In general, composites with smaller particles
were used as anterior restorations because of their increased aesthetics but not in posterior applications because of their weaker
mechanical properties, and the opposite was true for composites
with larger particle sizes with higher filler loadings. However, the
advent of hybrid composites makes formulations of universal
composite applicable in all five classes of restorations. There are
now universal, universal flowable, and universal bulk-fill composites. There is currently not enough information to meaningfully
discuss universal bulk-fill composites except that an example is
the GC America G-aenial BULK Injectable, so this topic is not
included in this chapter.
The vast majority of new universal composites are nanohybrids
with good combinations of high filler loading, mechanical properties, and esthetics. Exceptions include the 3M Filtek Supreme
Ultra and Kerr Premise, which are nanofills. However, Filtek
Supreme Ultra contains nanoclusters that are in the micron-size
range, and Premise contains prepolymerized fillers (PPFs) similar
to nanohybrids. Universal composites are typically highly filled
(75% to 89% fill by weight and up to 70% by volume) to impart

very good mechanical properties with transverse strengths between
100 and 170 MPa and a modulus between 7 and 11 GPa. The
nanoparticles help enhance esthetics to allow for anterior placement. In addition, many products (e.g., Kerr Premise, Dentsply
Sirona TPH Spectra ST, GC America Kalore, and Ivoclar Tetric
EvoCeram) contain larger PPFs that not only allow for increased
filler loading but also allow for greater polishability because the
PPFs are polymer based. Several products have also modified fillers and their refractive indices to produce a chameleon effect (e.g.,
GC America Gradia Direct X and Kalore, and Kerr Harmonize
and Herculite Ultra) to enhance the ease of color matching.
The universal flowable category is misleading because many are
for cavity base linings for the corresponding universal composite
or only for class V restorations. As such, they are not universal
composites. Those truly universal flowable composites have flexural strengths, moduli, wear, and esthetic properties in the range
of universal composites, and their flowability is produced through
the system’s thixotropic properties, which allow these composites
to flow under pressure and be injected but become more elastic and prevent slumping. Hence, some products may be called
“injectable” rather than “flowable.” Their flow properties are in
the low-flow range of flowable composites. Again, most of these
products are nanohybrids, except GC America’s G-Aenial Universal Flo and G-Aenial Universal Injectable, which are nanofills with
modified silanation to increase filler loading (69% by weight and
50% by volume) and the bond between the resin and filler to
increase mechanical properties. Other examples of universal flowable composites include Shofu Beautifil Flow Plus X and VOCO
GrandioSo Flow and Heavy Flow.

Classification of Composites by Unique
Properties
As composites have become the dominant materials in restorative
dentistry, they have also been formulated to address additional
demands from the material. The unique properties discussed in
this section include low-shrinkage composites, self-adhesive flowable composites, and bioactive composites.

Low-Shrinkage Composites
With polymerization shrinkage being a major deficiency with dental composites, there have been many advancements to develop
low-shrinkage composites. These advancements can be separated
into advancements that maximize filler loading and those in lowshrinkage monomers.
Maximizing Filler Loading

The role of fillers in reducing polymerization shrinkage has been
discussed earlier. The first dental composite marketed as a lowshrinkage composite was the Bisco Aelite LS with optimized filler
loading as high as 89% by weight and 75% by volume, which is
still the highest filler loading by volume reported. The Aelite LS
has a filler particle size range of 0.04 to 3.5 μm and a volumetric
shrinkage of 1.5%, but because of the larger particles, this material
is only recommended for posterior class I, II, and VI restorations
and not for aesthetic applications.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the key strategies used in the new monomers to make composites
low shrinkage?

O
O

O

O
O

O
m

H
N

O

H
N

O
N
H

O

H
N

O

103

Resin-Based Composites

CHAPTER 5

O
O

O

O
m

n

O
O

• Figure 5-15 A high-molecular-weight polyurethane dimethacrylate monomer, DX-511, that contains a
long, rigid central section between flexible methacrylate end groups (Kalore, GC America, Alsip, IL). Like
urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA), DX-511 has urethane (–NH–CO–O–) groups that connect a central segment between two ethylmethacrylate end groups. It also contains 2m + 1 cyclohexane rings. (Courtesy
Dr. Barry K. Norling.)

The Shofu Beautifil Bulk Restorative similarly has a filler loading as high as 87% by weight and 75% by volume and a volumetric shrinkage of 1.7%. This material is also only indicated
for posterior, nonaesthetic class I and II applications. Interestingly, the Shofu Beautifil II LS has lower filler loading at 83%
by weight but lower volumetric shrinkage at 0.85%, yet higher
shrinkage stress than the Beautifil Bulk Restorative (2.72 MPa
vs. 1.06 MPa, respectively). This surprising difference in shrinkage stress is caused by Beautifil Bulk Restorative having a lower
elastic modulus.
Low-Shrinkage Monomers

The influence of monomers on polymerization shrinkage has also
been discussed earlier. In this section, we will discuss four monomers that have been used to formulate low-shrinkage composites.
Kalore, also known as DX-511 (GC America) (Figure 5-15),
has a high molecular weight and a long rigid central section with
flexible methacrylate end groups; these provide rodlike shapes
that facilitate self-assembly into compact molecular structures.
This, together with dilution of the number of polymerizable end
groups as a result of the high molecular weight (895 vs. 512 for
bis-GMA), reduces polymerization shrinkage, and the flexible
end groups promote reactivity and enhance monomer–polymer
conversion.
N’Durance (Septodont USA) is a dimer dicarbamate dimethacrylate (DDCDMA) product that also contains a bulky central
group, somewhat analogous to TDC-urethane dimethacrylate.
The bulky center is made up of a six-carbon aliphatic ring with
two long hydrocarbon side chains derived from a linoleic acid
dimer (Figure 5-16). The center section is connected to two
methacrylate end groups via urethane groups (−NH−CO−O−,
also referred to as carbamate groups). The chain length between
reactive ends is very long (having a molecular weight of 843),
similar to that of DX-511 (see Figure 5-15), which provides double-bond dilution and hence reduced shrinkage; the bulky center
section allows greater conversion during copolymerization and
greater stress relaxation prior to the gel point. A further advantage
is the hydrophobic nature of the center group, which restricts
water absorption and solubility with the other dimethacrylates
in the formulation. This leads to the formation of two separate
phases during polymerization and produces a small expansion
that partially offsets the polymerization shrinkage.
Venus Diamond (Kulzer) is a resin product based on
4,8-di(methacryloxy methylene)-tricyclodecane (TCDDMA), a
bulky, space-filling dimethacrylate monomer (Figure 5-17). The
bulky three-ring central group provides steric hindrance, which
holds the monomers apart and thus slows the rate of polymerization. This lengthens the time needed for the crosslinking
reaction to reach the gel point and provides time for adjacent

O

O
TCDDMA
O

O

• Figure 5-16 4,8-Di(methacryloxymethylene)-tricyclodecane (TCDDMA),
a bulky, space-filling urethane dimethacrylate monomer.
polymer chain segments to slip among themselves, rearrange to
lower-energy configurations, and relieve developing stresses before
the gel point is reached, resulting in one of the lower-curing-stress
resins currently reported among commercial products.
Filtek LS (3M ESPE) involves an entirely different chemistry
based on epoxy, rather than acrylic functionality. This product is
no longer available on the market but is included here in case
future products contain epoxy chemistry. These tetra-functional
“silorane” monomers (Figure 5-18) use ring-opening polymerization. Silorane chemistry uses a combination of epoxy functionality
(three-unit ring with two carbons and one oxygen) combined with
siloxane units (–O−Si−O–) that can be cured with low shrinkage
via a cationic crosslinking mechanism by means of ring-opening
polymerization. When the rings open, they lengthen and occupy
more space; the resulting expansion offsets a substantial proportion of the polymerization shrinkage. Previously, epoxy systems
were not used for dental applications because a nontoxic curing
initiator with hydrolytic stability could not be found.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What technology is employed to make composites self-adhesive?

Self-Adhesive Flowable Composites
The process of bonding composites to the tooth is complicated. As such, the development of dentin bonding agents has
gone from “three step” to “one step” with one bottle of liquid.
Self-adhesive flowable composites, which contain self-etching
and adhesive monomers for bonding to hydroxyapatite, may
practically eliminate the bottles and the use of a separate bonding
agent. These composites would be used like conventional flowable composites in small class I cavities, as a first or base layer
under fillings, and as pit and fissure sealants, but without the
need for a bonding agent.
Currently, three commercial self-adhesive flowable composites exist, each containing a monomer that etches and adheres
to tooth structure. DMG Constic contains 10-methacryloyloxydecyl dihydrogen phosphate (MDP) monomer, which was
found to form stable bonds with hydroxyapatite with the formation of 10-MDP-Ca salts. Kerr Vertise Flow contains glycerol phosphate dimethacrylate (GPDM) monomers, which have

104

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

O

O

O

O
N
H

O
O

N
H

O
O

• Figure 5-17 Dimer dicarbamate dimethacrylate (DDCDMA), a phase-separating cycloaliphatic urethane
dimethacrylate with a bulky center, is composed of a six-carbon aliphatic ring with two long hydrocarbon
side chains derived from a linoleic acid dimer. (Courtesy Dr. Barry K. Norling.)
O

O
O Si
Si

O

O

Si
Si O

O
O

• Figure 5-18 Tetrafunctional silorane monomer polymerizes via a cationic-initiated, epoxy-ring–opening, crosslinking mechanism. When the rings
open, the chains lengthen and occupy more space and partially offset the
polymerization shrinkage. (Adapted from Weinmann W, et al: Siloranes in
dental composites. Dent Mater 21:68–74, 2005.)

a strong etching effect but form a weaker chemical bond with
hydroxyapatite compared with other self-adhesive monomers.
Pentron Fusio Liquid Dentin uses 4-methacryloxyethyl trimetellitic acid (4-META) to etch and bond via its carboxylate groups
to the calcium in hydroxyapatite.
Product brochures show dentin shear bond strengths of 24, 20,
and 15 MPa for Constic, Vertise Flow, and Fusio Liquid Dentin,
respectively. However, Peterson et al. reported that after thermocycling for 5000 cycles at temperatures of 5 to 55 °C, dentin bond
strengths deteriorated to 0.3, 0.7. and 2.4 MPa, and enamel bond
strengths deteriorated to 3.9, 1.4, and 2.5 MPa for Constic, Vertise Flow, and Fusio Liquid Dentin, respectively. The results are
suspected to be caused by the low filler loading of these flowables
and the hydrophilic nature of the self-etching and adhesive monomers, which may increase water imbibition and subsequent polymer degradation.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What is the main characteristic of a bioactive composite?
Which released ions are responsible for hydroxyapatite formation?

Bioactive Composites
The definition of a bioactive material in biomedical science is a
material that is not just biocompatible or bioinert but one that
produces a favorable biological response, such as repair or regeneration of tissue. In dental materials, bioactive materials have

traditionally included those that release fluoride ions, such as glass
ionomers, resin-modified glass ionomers (RMGIs), and compomers (Chapter 7, Glass ionomer Cement and Combination
Cements). Released F– ions can induce remineralization and bind
with apatite to form stronger fluorapatite to protect the tooth
from acid demineralization. However, glass ionomers and RMGIs
are not very aesthetic and have poor mechanical properties. As
such, they are mainly used as class V restorations and as cements.
New and improved bioactive composites include DMG’s
Ecosite Bulk Fill composite, Parkell’s Predicta Bioactive composites (Bulk, Core-Stackable, and Core-Flowable), Shofu’s Beautifil
composites (II LS, Bulk Flowable, Flow Plus, and Flow Plus X),
and Pulpdent’s ACTIVA BioACTIVE restorative. Interestingly,
DMG’s Ecosite Bulk Fill composite is not marketed as a bioactive composite, despite claims that this product releases F– ions.
Parkell’s Predicta Bioactive composites simply release Ca2+, PO4–,
and F− to trigger apatite formation. However, there is currently
not much information available for how Predicta Bioactive composites release these ions.
Shofu’s Beautifil composites are “hybrid” composites called
Giomer that are like RMGIs and compomers with modified
filler. The aim is to combine the fluoride-releasing and recharging ability of glass ionomers with the mechanical properties of
nanohybrid composites. The advancement here is that instead
of using alumino-silicate glass particles to release F− ions,
Giomers use fluoro-boro-alumino-silicate glass particles with a
surface coating of a glass ionomer trapped in a polyacid matrix
to also release Na+, Sr2+, Al3+, SiO4–, and BO3. The SiO4– and
F− ions are used to promote remineralization, and the F− and
Sr2+ ions are used for converting hydroxyapatite to the stronger
fluoro-apatite and strontium-apatite. The ion exchange from
Giomer fillers is also supposed to neutralize acid that leads to
tooth demineralization.
Pulpdent’s ACTIVA BioACTIVE restorative is a dual-cured
RMGI/compomer, which is based on urethane dimethacrylate that increases composite toughness and reduces wear compared with RMGIs and compomers. This composite releases and
recharges with Ca2+, PO4−, and F− to stimulate apatite formation
and teeth remineralization and releases more PO4– under acidic
conditions to claim its “smart” material status. This product is also
self-adhesive as a result of the polyacrylic acid in the glass ionomer
component and phosphate-based monomers in the ionic resin
(Chapter 7, Zinc Polycarboxylate Cement and Glass Ionomer
Cement). The system is a dual-cured material that uses an automix
syringe that will entail some of the disadvantages inherent in dualcured composites. Its transverse strength is toward the lower end
of universal composites (120 MPa). However, a 2019 randomized controlled study by van Dijken et al. suggested that ACTIVA

CHAPTER 5

BioACTIVE, as used in posterior restorations, may not bond to
dentin or prevent secondary caries. The article cited a significantly
higher failure rate compared with a nonbioactive nanofill composite as soon as 1 year (24.1% vs. 2.5%, respectively) as a result of
lost restorations, postoperative symptoms, and secondary caries.

Properties of Resin-Based Composites
Table 5-3 presents a compilation of selected physical and mechanical properties of various types of composites. Additional properties
described in this section include degree of cure, resin matrix constrain, strengthening mechanism, curing shrinkage and shrinkage
stress, wear, clinical longevity, placement time, and biocompatibility.

Degree of Conversion
The DC is a measure of the percentage of carbon–carbon double
bonds that have been converted to become part of a polymeric
chain (Figure 5-19). The higher the DC, the better the strength,
wear resistance, and many other properties essential to resin performance. A conversion of 50% to 60%, typical of highly crosslinked bis-GMA–based composites, implies that 50% to 60% of

Unreacted, pendent
methacrylate double bond

Resin-Based Composites

105

the methacrylate groups have polymerized. This does not mean
that 40% to 50% of the monomers are left unpolymerized in the
resin. The most likely scenario is that one of the two methacrylate
groups per dimethacrylate molecule is covalently bonded to the
polymer, with the rest of the molecule forming a pendant group.
Conversion of the monomer to a polymer depends on the resin
composition; the irradiance of the light source; the light transmission through the material; and the concentrations of sensitizer,
initiator, and inhibitor. The total DC within resins does not differ between chemical-activated and light-activated composites
containing the same monomer formulations as long as adequate
light curing is employed. Conversion values of 50% to 70% are
achieved at room temperature for both curing modes. Likewise,
the polymerization shrinkage of comparable light-activated and
chemical-activated resins is not significantly different.

Matrix Constraint
When thermal expansion arises, the interfacial bond between
the resin matrix and the filler with a lower coefficient of thermal
expansion (nearly zero in some cases) prevents the resin matrix
from pulling away and, thus, reduces expansion of the matrix.

Unreacted
dimethacrylate
monomer

Fully reacted
dimethacrylate
crosslink

• Figure 5-19 The degree of conversion reflects the percentage of methacrylate double bonds that are
converted to single bonds during the curing reaction. This figure shows that a cured resin can contain
dimethacrylate groups with zero, one, or two unreacted double bonds. If at least one double bond has
reacted, the dimethacrylate group is bound to the polymer network as a “pendant” group with one double
bond available for further reaction. Any completely unreacted monomers can migrate out of the cured
resin. Crosslinked groups strengthen and make the resin rigid, whereas pendant groups plasticize the
resin, and unreacted monomer softens and swells the resin structure, as explained in Chapter 2, Thermal
Properties.

106

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Conversely, during cooling, the matrix contracts and decreases the
space occupied by the filler, but because the filler occupies that
space, full contraction is prevented or reduced.
This constraint does have limits. During expansion, the composite can fracture within the matrix because of the added tension
at the resin–filler interface, depending on whether the interfacial
bond is stronger than the fracture toughness of the filler or the
matrix. In contraction, the composite can fracture within the
matrix or within the filler particle, depending on which is weaker.

Weak
interface

A

Strengthening Mechanism
The strength of composites is highly dependent on the bonding
between the weak matrix and the strong filler particles. Without
the coupling agent, the filler particles cannot absorb stresses in the
matrix and act as if they were voids. Thus a crack traveling through
the matrix simply bypasses the particles. The energy required to
detour around noncoupled particles is lower because the lack of
coupling at the filler–matrix interface makes this interface behave
as an existing “crack.” In a true composite, as the crack propagates to a bonded filler particle, the crack must pass around the
particle because the filler particle is stronger than the matrix and
the interfacial bond. Thus the path the crack must take around
the particles has to be created, and the creation of the new path
requires additional energy. The additional energy needed must
come from the increase of the external stress acting on the composite. This makes the composite tougher.
If the interfacial bond is weaker than the matrix, a process of
crack blunting occurs (Figure 5-20). As the crack propagates to
the weak interface, a void or tear opens up in front of the advancing crack because of the stresses that the weak bond experiences.
However, this void is perpendicular to the propagating crack; thus
when the crack arrives, the tip of the crack has been blunted, and
more stress is required to propagate the crack.
Note that the use of a crosslinked polymer matrix also increases
toughness because the crosslinkage prevents the polymer chains
from being drawn and separated as the crack propagates. However, the material then becomes brittle.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the problems that result from shrinkage and curing-induced
marginal stress during the polymerization of restorative resins?
How are polymerization stresses affected by the presence of reinforcing
fillers in dental composites?

Cure Shrinkage and Managing Shrinkage Stress
Cure shrinkage arises as the monomer is converted to polymer
because the free space a polymer chain occupies is about 20% less
than that of a matching number of monomers. During the early
stage of the polymerization, the material is still soft, and that allows
the growing polymer chains to adjust their position to relieve the
stress they are under. When polymerization reaches the gelation or
the gel point, and the material begins to become rigid, the growing
chains will not be able to move as easily and thus become stressed as
polymerization progresses. The resultant polymerization stress can
be affected by the total volume of the composite material, the type
of composite, the polymerization rate, and the ratio of bonded/
nonbonded surfaces or the configuration of the tooth preparation
(C-factor). These stresses tend to develop at the tissue–composite
interface, stressing the bond, and eventually producing a gap at the

B

Secondary
crack initiated

C

Crack tip
blunting

• Figure 5-20 Crack propagation near weakly bonded interface. A, A crack
propagates toward a weak interface under the influence of a tensile stress.
B, A secondary crack initiated at the weak interface when the stress induced
at the interface is greater than the interfacial bond strength. C, When the
main crack reaches the secondary crack, its propagation is impeded by a
process called crack blunting. (Adapted from Darvell BW: Materials Science
for Dentistry, ed 10, Cambridge, UK, 2018, Woodhead Publishing Ltd.)

restoration margins. Consequently, the risk for marginal leakage
and the ensuing problems of marginal staining and secondary caries are exacerbated. Undoubtedly, this is one of the greatest problems of composites used for class II and V restorations.
As discussed previously, light-activated resins give the operator control of working time and eliminate porosity from mixing
the two-part systems of chemical-activated resins. However, the
internal pores in self-cured resins act to relax residual stresses that
build up during curing (the pores enlarge during hardening and
reduce the concentration of stresses at the margins). Also, the
slower curing rate of chemical activation allows a larger portion of
the shrinkage stress to relax by internal flow before the gel point.
Two general approaches have been followed in seeking to overcome the problem of stress concentration and marginal failure experienced with light-activated resins: reduction in volume contraction by
altering the chemistry and composition of the resin system and clinical techniques designed to offset the stresses caused by polymerization
shrinkage. Reduction in volume contraction has been achieved by
using larger monomers to “dilute” the number of double bonds that
need to be reacted and by the addition of fillers that reduce the quantity of resin needed in the composite. Some low-shrinkage monomers
are described earlier in the Low-Shrinkage Composites section. Clinical techniques involving incremental buildup and control of the curing rate are described in the following sections.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can the composite clinical manipulation technique be used to improve
the integrity of the marginal seal in a composite restoration?

CHAPTER 5

A

B

Resin-Based Composites

107

C

• Figure 5-21 Incremental buildup of the box. A, First incremental layer of resin composite (gray area)
has been placed and cured. B, Second increment being cured with a light source. C, Third composite
increment during curing.

Incremental Buildup and Cavity Configuration
One technique attempts to reduce the C-factor, which is related
to the geometry of the cavity preparation and represented by the
ratio of bonded to nonbonded surface areas. Residual polymerization stress increases directly with this ratio. During curing,
shrinkage leaves the bonded cavity surfaces in a state of stress; the
nonbonded, free surfaces (i.e., those that reproduce the original
external tooth anatomy) relax some of the stress by contracting
inward toward the bulk of the material. A layering technique
(Figure 5-21) in which the restoration is built up in increments,
curing one layer at a time, effectively reduces polymerization
stress by minimizing the C-factor. That is, thinner layers reduce
the bonded surface area and maximize the nonbonded surface
area, thus minimizing the associated C-factor. Thus an incremental technique overcomes both the limited depth of cure of most
light-cured composites and the residual stress concentration but
adds to the time and difficulty of placing a restoration.
Soft-Start, Ramped Curing, and Delayed Curing
Another approach that is used to offset light-activated polymerization stress buildup is to follow the example of chemically initiated
systems by providing an initial low rate of polymerization, thereby
extending the time available for stress relaxation before reaching the gel point. This can be accomplished by using a soft-start
technique, whereby curing begins at low light irradiance and finishes with high irradiance. This approach allows for a slow initial
rate of polymerization and a high initial level of stress relaxation
during the early stages and ends at the maximum irradiance once
the gel point has been reached. This drives the curing reaction to
the highest possible conversion only after much of the stress has
been relieved. A number of studies have demonstrated that varying levels of stress reduction in tooth-cavity walls can be achieved
in this way, while not increasing the total exposure time or sacrificing either degree of cure or depth of cure. Consequently, a
variety of protocols have been developed and the necessary lamps
made available that automatically provide one or more soft-start
exposure sequences.
Variations of this technique include ramping and delayed cure.
In ramping, the irradiance is gradually increased or “ramped up”
during the exposure. Such ramping employs stepwise, linear, or
exponential modes. In delayed curing, the restoration is initially

incompletely cured at low irradiance. The clinician then sculpts and
contours the resin to the correct occlusion and later applies a second
exposure of light for the final cure. This delay allows substantial
stress relaxation to take place. The longer the time that is available for relaxation, the lower is the residual stress that is expressed.
Delayed curing and exponential ramp curing appear to provide
greater reductions in curing stress but do require more time.
In response to this situation, care should be taken when highirradiance lamps are used. Increased lamp irradiance allows for
shorter exposure times for a given depth of cure in a particular shade
and type of resin. Thus these high-irradiance lamps should, in principle, provide substantial savings in chair time. However, a highirradiance, short-exposure time causes an accelerated rate of curing,
which inevitably leads to substantial residual stress buildup because
of the inherently less time for stress-relaxation mechanisms to take
place. Because of these tradeoffs, there appears to be little advantage to ramped, delayed, or soft-start curing techniques. Numerous
laboratory studies and some clinical evidence support this conclusion. Thus the clinician should carefully consider the tradeoffs
before investing in these more expensive types of curing lamps.

Wear
In addition to polymerization shrinkage, other frequent clinical
problems have been occlusal (Figure 5-22) and interproximal wear,
especially in the case of posterior composites. The mechanism of
occlusal wear is a complex problem that has been the subject of
much research. Unfortunately, before clinical use, abrasion and
wear resistance can be measured only by a laboratory test that simulates simplified environmental conditions. As of yet, no single test
method has been agreed upon as a valid predictor of clinical performance. Although several laboratory test methods are useful to guide
research and development efforts, controlled clinical evaluations are
the only reliable means of evaluating the durability and useful lifetime of restorative materials. However, based on such studies, the
best composites designed for posterior restorations still wear more
than natural enamel under identical conditions. Although wear-rate
differences of 10 to 20 μm/year may seem small for posterior composites, this wear rate still amounts to 0.1 to 0.2 mm more than
enamel over 10 years. Thus being cautious is important in selecting
the clinical cases to be treated with posterior composites.

108

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

• Figure 5-22 Scanning electron micrograph of a 9-year-old small-particle-filled composite, illustrating generalized wear surface by three-body
wear. (Courtesy Dr. Robert L. Erickson.)

Two principal mechanisms of composite wear have been proposed. The first mode is two-body wear, based on direct contact of
the restoration with an opposing cusp or with adjacent proximal
surfaces to mimic the high stresses developed in the small area of
contact. This is related to the higher force levels exerted by the
opposing cusp or forces transferred to proximal surfaces.
The second mode is three-body wear, which simulates the loss
of material in noncontact areas, most probably owing to contact
with food as this is forced across the occlusal surfaces. This type of
wear is affected in a complex way by a number of composite properties, such as toughness, porosity, stability of the silane coupling
agent, degree of monomer conversion, filler loading, and the sizes
and types of filler particles.
Clinically, although direct tooth-to-restoration contact occurs
infrequently during mastication, the loss of material caused
by direct wear in areas of tooth-to-tooth contact appears to be
greater than that of three-body abrasion by food in noncontact
areas. Composites in which the filler particles are small (1 μm or
less), high in concentration, and well bonded to the matrix are the
most resistant to wear. Large restorations tend to wear more than
smaller ones do, such as in restorations in molars compared with
those in premolars.
Variations among patients—such as differences in chewing
habits, force levels, and variations in oral environments—also play
a significant role in the wear process. A typical wear pattern for
a composite is shown in Figure 5-22 for a 9-year-old, chemicalactivated, small-particle–filled composite restoration. Although
the loss of material shown in this figure is more severe than that
for current restorative materials, the image illustrates the wear
phenomenon. Notice the smoother anatomical contours and the
exposed cavity walls where the composite has been worn away by
abrasion.
The major indications for class II composite restorations place
emphasis on the demand for esthetics. A conservative preparation
is preferred so that the tooth, rather than the composite, absorbs

more of the stress. The dentist must also be familiar with the rigorous placement procedures essential for success, as described
in textbooks on operative dentistry. However, there are obvious
contraindications. A composite class II restoration is doomed to
failure in the mouth of a patient who bruxes because of the greater
potential for wear. The use of posterior composites in a cariesactive mouth is also questionable because few current restorative
materials have the ability to provide an anticariogenic effect or to
resist leakage. If composites are used for such situations, the application of a hydrophilic sealing resin along the margins may be
beneficial. Nonetheless, with the greater demand for esthetics and
continual improvements in composite formulations, the use of
these materials in stress-bearing situations continues to increase.
In response, academic and industry research can be expected to
continue to improve the clinical durability of composite materials
(see later discussion of the longevity of composites).
The problem of wear in posterior resin applications has
been considerably reduced by ongoing advances in composite
technology. Nevertheless, difficulties still exist in high-stress situations related to inherent problems with both the mechanical
and chemical degradation of composites. However, polymerization shrinkage, technique sensitivity, and difficulty in obtaining
a predictable and reliable bond to dentin or cementum margins
are probably more important. These deficiencies remain a major
concern regarding the potential leakage associated with class II
restorations.

Longevity of Composites
The most commonly cited reasons for the failure of composites in
clinical studies are secondary caries, fracture, marginal deficiencies, and wear. However, these reasons vary greatly depending
on the type of study (randomized clinical trial versus privatepractice setting), type of composite used, period of observation,
and other aspects of study design. Nonetheless, when properly
placed, composites can last for many years even in posterior
regions, where wear and bite forces are greatest. The clinical performance of dental restorations is best judged on the basis of
long-term clinical trials, preferably those based on randomized
controlled designs. However, very few studies of this type exist
in the dental literature. We are using four studies to discuss the
longevity of composites.
A critical review of clinical data over 10 years by Chadwick
et al. shows that the survival rates of composites are significantly
lower than those of amalgam. Amalgam also demonstrated
less variability in survival rates (Figure 5-23). The comparative survival rates for amalgam versus composite restorations
in permanent teeth at 3, 4, 5, and 7 years are summarized in
Table 5-4. Similar comparative data for restorations in primary
teeth after 3 and 4 years are also listed in this table. The overall
survival rate for composites in permanent teeth after 7 years
was 67.4%, compared with 94.5% for amalgam restorations.
More than 90% of amalgam restorations in permanent teeth
survived longer than 9 years. In comparison, only 64% of glass
ionomer restorations survived after 5 years. Only 41% of class
V composites placed with dentin bonding agents survived longer than 5 years. The study concluded that the class II glass
ionomer/composite restorations should be avoided because
of a high percentage of failures at the gingival margin of the
proximal box.
In a retrospective study on the longevity of 1955 posterior composites placed between 1990 and 1997 in a private-practice setting,

CHAPTER 5

Resin-Based Composites

109

1.0
0.9

10-Year survival probability

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
Amalgam
Composite

0.1
0.0

212

216

269

405

396

460

414

765

460

811

501

854

765

858

801

864

854

Study number

• Figure 5-23 Ten-year survival probability for posterior composite and amalgam restorations. (Data from
Chadwick BL, Dummer PMH, Dunstan F, et al: The Longevity of Dental Restorations: A Systematic Review,
York, UK, 2001, National Health Service Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of York.)

TABLE 5-4

Comparison of Survival Probabilities for Various Types of Restorations after 3, 4, 5, and 7 Years
3 Years

4 Years

5 Years

7 Years

Primary Teeth

Permanent
Teeth

Primary Teeth

Permanent
Teeth

Primary Teeth

Permanent
Teeth

Primary Teeth

Permanent
Teeth

Amalgam

95.3

97.2

95.1

96.6

90.8

95.4

—

94.5

Composite

82.4

90.0

67.2

85.6

—

78.2

—

67.4

Glass ionomer

51.5

73.8

51.5

73.8

31.2

64.9

—

—

Class V composite
with DBA

—

83.7

—

47.7

—

41.5

—

—

Ceramic or
composite inlay

—

93.3

—

90.1

—

85.3

—

Restoration Type

DBA, dentin bonding agent.
Modified from Chadwick BL, Dummer PMH, Dunstan F, et al: The Longevity of Dental Restorations: A Systematic Review, York, UK, 2001, National Health Service Centre for Reviews and Disseminatioin,
University of York.

Opdam et al. reported a survival rate for composite resin of 91.7%
at 5 years and 82.2% at 10 years. There was a significant effect of
the size of restored surfaces on the survival of the restorations—
that is, the more conservative the restoration, the longer these
restorations survived.
In a 22-year follow-up of 362 restorations placed between
1986 and 1990, da Rosa Rodolpho et al. reported survival rates of
midfill hybrid composites at 74% and minifill hybrid composites
at 64%, respectively. The study also reported that the annual failure rate in the second part of the observation period had become
constant for midfill composites, whereas minifill composites had
shown an increase, suggesting that the physical properties of the
composite might have some impact on restoration longevity.

One systematic review by Alvanforoush and colleagues compared composite failure between the two decades of 1995 to 2005
and 2006 to 2016 using studies that were at least 24 months
long. Twelve studies that were used for the systematic review had
observation periods of posterior composites of longer than 6 years.
Five were published between 1995 and 2005 and observed posterior composites for 10 years. Seven were published between 2006
and 2016 that ranged from 6 to 22 years. Interestingly, overall,
they found that composite survival rates actually decreased from
89.4% in the studies from 1995 to 2005 to 86.9% in the studies from 2006 to 2016. However, the incidence of failure from
secondary caries decreased from 29.5% to 25.7%, and additionally, the incidence of composite fracture increased from 28.8% to

110

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

39.1%. The authors note that these findings may be attributable
to the increased use of composites for larger restorations. Table 5-5
summarizes long-term survival rates for the different types of composites in this review.

Placement Time of Composites
Although the performance of posterior composites has greatly
improved during the past decade relative to amalgams, the placement time is significantly longer for composites and much longer
for ceramic and composite inlays (Figure 5-24). Obviously, the cost
of restorations for the patient is also proportionately higher for the
inlay prostheses. In fact, the relative cost per tooth per year over a
5-year period in terms of multiples for amalgam is 1, composite is
1.62, and ceramic or composite inlay restorations is 6.35. The relative cost per tooth per year of amalgam restorations is significantly
less than that of composites after 10 years (1 vs. 3.36). A comparative analysis of the placement times is summarized in Table 5-6 for
class I, class II (two-surface), class II (three-surface, mesial-occlusaldistal), and pin-retained cusp replacement restorations.

Biocompatibility of Composites
A chemical insult to the pulp from composites is possible if components leach out or diffuse from the material and subsequently
reach the pulp. Inadequately cured composite materials at the floor
of a cavity can serve as a reservoir of diffusible components that
can induce long-term pulp inflammation. This situation is of particular concern for light-activated materials. If a clinician attempts
to polymerize too thick a layer of resin or if the exposure time to
the light is inadequate (as discussed previously), the uncured or
poorly cured material can release leachable constituents adjacent
to the pulp. Nonetheless, adequately polymerized composites are
relatively biocompatible because they exhibit minimal solubility,
and unreacted species are leached in very small quantities. From a
toxicological point of view, these amounts should be too small to
cause toxic reactions. However, from an immunological point of
view, under extremely rare conditions, some patients and dental
personnel can develop allergic responses to these materials.
The most noted biocompatibility issue related to composite
resin is the release of bisphenol A (BPA) from composites based

60

Long-Term Survival Rates of Different
Types of Composites

Composite Type

Study Term (Failure
Mechanism)

Fiber-reinforced packable

6y

75%–87%

Midfill

22 y

74%

Minifill

22 y

64%

Hybrid

10 y

80%

10 y (secondary caries)

40%

15 y (wear)

74%

18 y (fracture)

70%

Low shrinkage

15 y

77%

Universal nanohybrid

10 y

97%

Survival Rate

Adapted from Alvanforoush N, et al: Comparison between published clinical success of
direct resin composite restorations in vital posterior teeth in 1995–2005 and 2006–2016
periods. Aust Dent J 62(2):132–145, 2017.

TABLE 5-6

Class I

Class II

MOD

Cusp
coverage

50

Placement time (minutes)

TABLE 5-5

40

30

20

10

0
Amalgam

Composite

Inlay

• Figure 5-24 Placement time required for posterior amalgam, composite, and ceramic and composite inlay restorations. (Data from Chadwick
BL, Dummer PMH, Dunstan F, et al: The Longevity of Dental Restorations:
A Systematic Review, York, UK, 2001, National Health Service Centre for
Reviews and Dissemination, University of York.)

Comparison of Average Time (Minutes) Required for Initial (I) and Replacement (R) Restorations
AMALGAM

COMPOSITE

COMPOSITE AND CERAMIC INLAY

Restoration Type

I

R

I

R

I

R

Class I

11

11

15

16

34

34

Class II

15

13

24

24

41

40

MOD: mesio-occlusal-distal

19

19

29

31

45

45

Cusp replacement with pins

25

26

33

34

44

44

I, Initial restoration; R, replacement restoration.
Adapted from Chadwick BL, Dummer PMH, Dunstan F, et al: The Longevity of Dental Restorations: A Systematic Review, York, UK, 2001, National Health Service Centre for Reviews and Dissemination,
University of York.

CHAPTER 5

Resin-Based Composites

111

on bis-GMA. BPA, a precursor of bis-GMA and an impurity in
composite resin, has been shown to be a xenoestrogen, a synthetic
compound that mimics the effects of estrogen by having an affinity
for estrogen receptors. This estrogenicity of BPA was first reported
in a clinical study in 1996, where BPA was collected in saliva after
1 hour of sealant placement, with the conclusion that sealant application led to xenoestrogen exposure in children. This led to a deluge
of follow-up examinations to determine the validity of these results.
Studies have confirmed the release of BPA from composite resins, but the influence of BPA on the hormone balance is still in
question. Additional information on the biocompatibility of restorative materials and the effect of BPA is presented in Chapter 17,
Estrogenicity and Systemic Reactions.

finishing of composite restorations for up to 24 hours because
polymerization is incomplete at placement, although composite
manufacturers recommend that finishing be accomplished shortly
after placement. Studies have shown that delayed finishing can
actually increase marginal leakage and has no effect on surface
characteristics compared with immediate finishing. Also, delayed
finishing has a minimal effect on hardness. Thus for all practical purposes, almost all composite restorations should be finished
and polished shortly after placement during the same appointment, although the finishing should be delayed for approximately
15 min after curing.

Finishing and Polishing of Composites

A variety of materials and instruments can be used to finish and
polish composite restorations. The use of a scalpel blade or any
thin, sharp-edged instrument to remove flash on the proximal
areas is recommended. However, this is a very risky procedure,
especially if the trimming procedure involves shearing in a direction toward the composite and away from the gingival margin,
which can lead to localized debonding and leakage. Trimming
forces should be applied either parallel to the margin or toward
the gingival tissue. Coarse to ultrafine aluminum-oxide discs
can be applied to areas with difficult access around the proximal surfaces or in embrasures. Tungsten-carbide burs or fine
diamond tips can be used to adjust occlusal surfaces and blend
the composite to the surfaces of the teeth. Several studies in the
literature have rated many of these systems as to their effect on
surface smoothness and microleakage. Currently, aluminumoxide discs produce the best surface, while also inducing minimal
trauma. Other systems include resin-finishing instruments that
use fine and extrafine polishing pastes, silicone-based systems,
and silicon-carbide–impregnated polishing brushes and points.
Although high stresses may be associated with surface grinding
and polishing, a recent study has shown that the type of polishing system used does not significantly affect the development of
microleakage.

The term finishing usually refers to the process of adapting the
restorative material to the tooth (e.g., removing overhangs and
shaping occlusal surfaces that often leave behind irregular surfaces), whereas polishing refers to removing surface irregularities
to achieve the smoothest possible surface. Residual surface roughness can encourage bacterial growth, which can lead to a myriad
of problems, including secondary caries, gingival inflammation,
and surface staining. The best possible surface finish is produced
by placing a smooth matrix strip against composite resin during
polymerization. However, achieving proper contours and margin
adaptation is often difficult without some amount of finishing
because the plastic strip does not yield with the convex and concave features like the tooth surfaces.
The mechanisms of finishing and polishing are discussed in
Chapter 16, Mechanics of Abrasive Procedures, along with the
types of instruments used in dentistry. This segment will concentrate on the factors influencing the finish and polish of composite
restoration: (1) environment, (2) delayed versus immediate finish,
(3) the types of materials and instruments, and (4) postpolishing
procedures.

Environment
Some advocates say that finishing in a dry field with the finishing
equipment mounted on a slow-speed handpiece allows for better visualization of the restoration margins. However, studies have
shown that a dry polishing technique results in an increase in marginal leakage, possibly because of heat production. Other studies
have shown that structural and chemical changes occur on the surfaces of restorations as a result of a dry environment. In contrast,
still other research has reported that the dry-polishing technique
has no effect on the hardness or surface structure. As with many
dental procedures, grinding and finishing are best accomplished
in moderation. The clinician should finish the restoration in an
environment where the margins are clearly discernible and where
minimal heat is generated. Excessive heat results in smearing of
the surface and depolymerization. Water-cooling during grinding
and finishing should ensure a standard surface quality.

Elapsed Time Between Curing of the Composite
and Finishing and Polishing
The elapsed time between curing and finishing of the composite may also have an effect on surface characteristics and resistance to leakage that develop. Some advocate delaying the

Types of Materials and Instruments

Surface Coating and Sealing
An important step in finishing and polishing is the application
of a bonding agent or a surface sealer. There has been extensive
documentation that the finishing (and possibly polishing) process
is detrimental to composite surfaces in that surface microcracks
are introduced, and the highly polymerized outer surface of the
resin composite material is removed. Application of a penetrating surface sealer or a low-viscosity resin with little or no filler
ensures that surface porosities are filled and microcracks sealed.
Studies have shown that this “rebonding” technique also significantly decreases microleakage by improving the marginal seal of
restorations.

Repair of Composites
Composites can be repaired by replacing lost material. This is a
useful procedure for correcting defects or altering the contours
on existing restorations. The procedures for adding new material
differ depending on whether the restoration is freshly polymerized
or an older restoration.
When a restoration has just been placed and polymerized, this
restoration may still have an oxygen-inhibited layer of resin on
the surface. The addition of new composite can be made directly

112

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Flexure strength (MPa)

Composite Resin Veneers
3 months

6 months

50

A

C

B

D

Group

• Figure 5-25 The influence of the method of composite repair on
strength. Flexural strength after storage in distilled water at 37 °C for 3 and
6 months. A, Original, unbroken samples serving as a control. B, Repair
without first acid-etching. C, Repair after acid-etching and the application of an unfilled resin. D, Repair after toluene/silane treatment to soften
the broken surfaces and facilitate permeation by new monomer. (Adapted from Söderholm K-J: Flexure strength of repaired dental composites.
Scand J Dent Res 94:364–369, 1986.)
to this layer because this represents, in essence, an excellent
bonding substrate. Even after the restoration has been polished,
adding more material can still repair a defect. A restoration that
has just been cured and polished may still have about 50% of
unreacted methacrylate groups to copolymerize with the newly
added material.
As the restoration ages, fewer and fewer unreacted methacrylate groups remain, and greater crosslinking reduces the ability of
fresh monomer to penetrate the matrix. The strength of the bond
between the original material and the new resin decreases in direct
proportion to the time that has elapsed between polymerization
and the addition of the new resin. Furthermore, polished surfaces
expose filler surfaces that are free from silane. Thus the filler surface area does not chemically bond to the new composite layer.
Even ideally—that is, with the addition of a silane-bonding agent
to the surface before the addition of new composite—the strength
of repaired composite is less than half the strength of the original
material (Figure 5-25).
Even though repair is essential to the overall longevity of composite restorations, there are very few reports of formal investigations or long-term trials concerning composite repair. Two- to
3-year clinical results have been reported showing good outcomes
for repairs or the resealing of marginal defects, and a 7-year recall
reinforced the use of a conservative repair strategy. A survey of general practitioners found that half always repair defective composite
margins adjacent to enamel, but most replace a restoration if the
defective margin is adjacent to dentin. Thus the repair of composite restorations with defective margins adjacent to enamel is
becoming the standard of care.

Composite-Based Indirect Restorations
Composite materials can be used to make direct restorations
extraorally and fixes to prepared teeth with a composite-based
bonding agent called resin cement (Chapter 7, Resin Cements).
Two noted applications are resin veneers and composite inlays
and onlays.

Originally, resin veneering materials were heat-polymerized polymethylmethacrylate, which were improved subsequently by the
addition of fillers and crosslinking agents. Microfill materials that
use high-molecular-weight dimethacrylates as resin matrices have
created renewed interest in resin-veneered metal restorations.
These resins are polymerized using visible light or a combination
of heat and pressure. In general, these new microfill resins have
physical properties superior to those of the original unfilled resin.
The first resin veneers were mechanically bonded to metal substrates using wire loops or retention beads. Recent improvements
in bonding mechanisms have included micromechanical retention
created by acid etching the base metal alloy and the use of chemical
bonding systems such as 4-META, phosphorylated methacrylate,
epoxy resin, or silicon dioxide flame-sprayed to the metal surface,
followed by the application of a silane coupling agent (silicoating).
Prosthetic resin-veneering materials have several advantages
and disadvantages compared with ceramics. The advantages
include ease of fabrication, predictable intraoral reparability, and
less wear of opposing teeth or restorations. The drawbacks include
low proportional limit and pronounced plastic deformation,
which contribute to distortion on occlusal loading. Therefore the
resin should be protected with metal occlusal surfaces whenever
feasible. Leakage of oral fluids and staining below the veneers, particularly those attached mechanically, are caused by dimensional
changes from water sorption, heating, and cooling. Surface staining and intrinsic discoloration tend to occur with these resins.
Resins are also susceptible to wear during toothbrushing. Thus
instructing the patient on proper cleaning procedures using a
soft toothbrush and mild abrasive toothpastes is necessary. Resinveneered metal restorations are not suitable for use as removable
partial denture abutment retainers, where the clasp arm engages
an undercut on the veneered surface, because the resin is not as
wear resistant as porcelain.
Resin composites can also be used as a conservative alternative
to conventional prosthodontic restorations, such as veneers for
masking tooth discoloration or malformation. The resins are used
as preformed laminate veneers, in which resin shells are adjusted
by grinding, and the contoured facing is bonded to tooth structure
using the acid-etching technique with either chemical-activated,
visible-light−activated, or dual-cured resin cements. Resins used
to cement indirect restorations, veneers, and prosthetic devices are
similar to flowable restorative resins but are adjusted to match the
needs of luting applications.

Indirect Posterior Composites
Composites for the fabrication of onlays and inlays are polymerized
externally, and then luted to the tooth with a composite-base cement.
Indirect composite inlays or onlays reduce wear and leakage and overcome some of the limitations of resin composites. Several different
approaches to resin inlay construction have been proposed: (1) the
use of both direct and indirect fabrication methods; (2) the application of light, heat, pressure, or a combination of these curing systems;
and (3) the combined use of hybrid and microfill composites.
The fabrication process for direct composite inlays first requires
the application of a separating medium (e.g., agar solution or
glycerin) to the prepared tooth. The restorative resin pattern is
then formed, light-cured, and removed from the preparation. The
rough inlay is then exposed to additional light for approximately
4 to 6 min or heat at approximately 100 °C for 7 min, after which

CHAPTER 5

the preparation is etched, the inlay is cemented into place with
(typically) a dual-cured resin, and then it is polished.
Composite systems are also available as indirect products. Indirect inlay resins require an impression and a dental laboratory technician to fabricate the inlay. In addition to conventional light- and
heat-curing methods, laboratory processing may employ heat (e.g.,
140 °C) and pressure (e.g., 0.6 MPa for 10 min). The potential
advantage of these materials is that a significantly higher degree of
polymerization is attained, which improves physical properties and
resistance to wear. Because the polymerization is completed before
placement into the prepared teeth, there are no shrinkage-induced
stresses, and bond failures are reduced, which reduces the potential
for leakage. Furthermore, these resins are repairable in the mouth and
are not as abrasive to the opposing tooth structure as ceramic inlays.
Laboratory studies support these expected advantages: for
example, a recent review revealed that the annual clinical failure
rates in class I and II posterior stress-bearing cavities are the same
for composite inlays as for amalgam restorations (1.9%), somewhat superior to those for direct composites (3.6%), and only
slightly (but not significantly) inferior to cast gold inlays and
onlays (1.4%). However, the technique sensitivity for indirect
resin restoration systems remains high, and their appropriateness
as a substitute for amalgam or cast restorations in all posterior
applications is not clear, even though the esthetics are appealing.

Selection Criteria for Posterior Composites
Not all patients should be considered as candidates for these posterior restorations. The primary indication for using direct posterior
composites in place of amalgams is esthetics. Unless the patient’s
esthetic demands are high, there are minimal advantages to using
resin restorations in posterior regions. Often the disadvantages,
coupled with the difficulty in manipulation, far outweigh the benefits. Other indications might include the need for conservative
preparations along with conservation of tooth structure. Because
composite restorations do not depend on mechanical undercuts
for retention, the concepts of resistance form and retention form
do not really apply to resin preparations. However, because of
their inferior physical properties, composites should not be used
for cuspal coverage or for large restorations exceeding one-third
the buccolingual width of the tooth. If possible, the occlusal load
should always be borne by sound tooth structure and never by
resin. Because wear is also an issue, posterior composites should
not be placed in patients experiencing parafunctional habits.
Another lesser indication is the use of composites to minimize
thermal conduction. Because amalgam is metallic, the material
tends to conduct heat more rapidly, leading to tooth sensitivity

Selected Readings
Albers H: Tooth-Colored Restoratives: Principles and Techniques, 9th ed,
Hamilton, ON, 2002, BC Decker.
The author discusses a complete array of composite systems, with
emphasis on clinical applications. The book combines the science of
dental polymers with discussions of clinical applications.
Alvanforoush N, Palamara J, Wong RH, et al: Comparison between published clinical success of direct resin composite restorations in vital
posterior teeth in 1995–2005 and 2006–2016 periods, Aust Dent J
62:132–145, 2017.
Boaro LCC, Goncalves F, Guimarães TC, et al: Polymerization stress,
shrinkage and elastic modulus of current low-shrinkage restorative
composites, Dent Mater 26:1144–1150, 2010.

Resin-Based Composites

113

and pain. The placement of composites or ceramics, which are
good thermal insulators, often reduces this occurrence.

Photocuring Training, Evaluation, and
Process Management
In order to reach a high degree of cure, light-cured resins must
receive sufficient energy at the appropriate wavelengths. The light
energy delivered to the composite is dictated by the operator technique of focusing light on the restoration, the type of curing light,
and the location of the restoration, and the energy needed for
proper curing depends on the type of resin used. Clinicians may
have dental radiometers to measure the irradiance at the emitting
tip of a curing light but might not be certain if sufficient energy has
been delivered to the restoration to reach an adequate cure level and
depth of cure.
The “MARC” (an acronym for “managing accurate resin curing,” BlueLight Analytics Inc., Halifax, NS) device and training
system shifts the paradigm away from measuring the average
irradiance of a curing light and only including the wavelengths
and energy actually received by the resin being polymerized. The
MARC device combines precise laboratory spectral technology
with clinically relevant measuring conditions within prepared dentoform teeth in a mannequin head. Spectrum-corrected sensors
inside the dentoform teeth are attached to a laboratory-grade spectroradiometer embedded within the manikin’s head to record the
light received from curing units. Output from the spectrometer is
fed into a laptop computer, where custom software provides realtime and accumulated comparison data: spectral irradiance, total
energy delivered over a given exposure duration, and the estimated
exposure duration needed to deliver a specified energy dosage.
In addition to providing real-time feedback to judge when
adequate photoenergy has been delivered, the MARC device can
also be used as a training aid for performing optimal photocuring in clinics. The effect of minor alterations in tip distance and
angle and movement during exposure is displayed in real time, and
the ultimate consequence in terms of altered energy delivered is
determined. The device can also be used to determine the ability
of various lamps to deliver adequate energy levels between different
tooth locations.

Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Josephine EsquivelUpshaw and Dr. Barry K. Norling for their contribution to the
previous edition of this chapter.
This investigation found that not all composites that claimed “lowshrinkage” exhibited reduced polymerization shrinkage. It was also
concluded that in order to effectively reduce polymerization stress
[not just shrinkage], a low post-gel shrinkage must be accompanied
by a relatively low elastic modulus.
Chen M-H: Update on dental nanocomposites, J Dent Res 89:549–560,
2010.
This article reviews recent studies of the development of dental nanocomposites and their clinical applications, as of 2010.
Darvell BW: Materials Science for Dentistry, 10th ed, Cambridge, UK, 2018,
Woodhead Publishing Ltd.
A comprehensive dental materials science textbook that connects clinical
performance properties to first principles and underlying mechanisms
in much greater detail than is typically presented to dental students. An

114

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

excellent reference for researchers, materials scientists, and those in academic dentistry, as well as students at all levels.
Dietz W, Montag R, Kraft U, et al: 15-year results of posterior composite
restorations using three-dimensional scanning electron microscopy,
J Dent 42:959–969, 2014.
Ferracane JL: Resin composite—state of the art, Dent Mater 27:29–38,
2011.
This review concludes that in 2010, the commercial materials available to the dental profession were of high quality and when used
appropriately have proven to deliver excellent clinical outcomes of
adequate longevity.

Peterson J, Rizk M, Hoch M, et al: Bonding performance of self-adhesive
flowable composites to enamel, dentin and a nano-hybrid composite,
Odontology 106:171–180, 2018.
van Dijken JW, Pallesen U: Posterior bulk-filled resin composite restorations:
A 5-year randomized controlled clinical study, J Dent 51:29–35, 2016.
van Dijken JWV, Pallesen U, Benetti A: A randomized controlled evaluation of posterior resin restorations of an altered resin modified glassionomer cement with claimed bioactivity, Dent Mater 35:335–343,
2019.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web version)
Useful Websites
The Biomaterials Network: https://biomat.net/site2/
Clinicians Report: https://www.cliniciansreport.org/
Dental Advisor: http://www.dentaladvisor.com/
Dentistry Today: https://www.dentistrytoday.com/dental-materials/972.
Managing Accurate Resin Curing (MARC): https://www.bluelightanalytics
.com/checkup.
Ormocer technology: https://www.ormocere.de/en.html
Polymer Science Learning Center, Macrogalleria—acrylic polymers:
http://www.pslc.ws/mactest/level3.htm.
POSS Technology, Hybrid Plastics: https://hybridplastics.com/us/what-is-poss/
Virtual Textbook of Polymer Science: http://plc.case.edu/tutorial/
enhanced/files/textbook.htm.
Publications and Patents
Academy of Dental Materials: International Congress on Dental Materials, Transactions, Houston, TX, 1990, Academy of Dental Materials,
Baylor College of Dentistry.
A host of review papers are presented on many aspects of dental composite chemistry, systems usage, dentin bonding agents, and microleakage.
Albers H: Tooth-Colored Restoratives: Principles and Techniques, 9th ed,
Hamilton, ON, 2002, BC Decker.
The author discusses a complete array of composite systems, with
emphasis on clinical applications. The book combines the science of
dental polymers with discussions of clinical applications.
Alvanforoush N, Palamara J, Wong RH, et al: Comparison between
published clinical success of direct resin composite restorations in
vital posterior teeth in 1995–2005 and 2006–2016 periods, Aust
Dent J 62:132–145, 2017.
Boaro LCC, Goncalves F, Guimarães TC, et al: Polymerization stress,
shrinkage and elastic modulus of current low-shrinkage restorative
composites, Dent Mater 26:1144–1150, 2010.
This investigation found that not all composites that claimed “lowshrinkage” exhibited reduced polymerization shrinkage. It was also
concluded that in order to effectively reduce polymerization stress (not
just shrinkage), a low postgel shrinkage must be accompanied by a
relatively low elastic modulus.
Bowen RL: Dental filling material comprising vinyl-silane treated fused
silica and a binder consisting of the reaction product of bisphenol A
and glycidyl methacrylate 112, Washington, DC, 1962, US Patent
3,006, US Patent and Trademark Office.
This patent marks a milestone in dentistry. It resulted in superior
resin-based materials and was issued a few years after Buonocore’s
discovery that resins could be bonded to acid-etched enamel. With
Bowen’s invention and Buonocore’s discovery, it became possible to
restore class IV cavities in a conservative and predictable way, which
had been impossible previously.
Chadwick BL, Dummer PMH, Dunstan F, et al: The Longevity of Dental
Restorations: A Systematic Review, York, UK, 2001, National Health
Service Centre for Reviews and Dissemination University of York.
A comprehensive evidence-based review of dental restorations.
Chen M-H: Update on dental nanocomposites, J Dent Res 89:549–560,
2010.
This article reviews recent studies of the development of dental nanocomposites and their clinical applications, as of 2010.
da Rosa Rodolpho PA, Cenci MS, Donassollo TA, et al: A clinical evaluation of posterior composite restorations: 17-year findings, J Dent
34:427–435, 2006.
Darvell BW: Glossary of Terms for Dental Materials Science, 11th ed, Cambridge, UK, 2011, Kuwait Publishing Ltd.
Darvell BW: Materials Science for Dentistry, 10th ed, Cambridge,
UK, 2018, Woodhead Publishing Ltd.
A comprehensive dental materials science textbook that connects clinical performance properties to first principles and underlying mechanisms in much greater detail than is typically presented to dental

students. An excellent reference for researchers, materials scientists,
and those in academic dentistry, as well as students at all levels.
Da Rosa Rodolpho PA, Donassollo TA, Cenci MS, et al: 22-year clinical
evaluation of the performance of two posterior composites with different filler characteristics, Dent Mater 27:955–963, 2011.
Dietz W, Montag R, Kraft U, et al: 15-year results of posterior composite restorations using three-dimensional scanning electron
microscopy, J Dent 42:959–969, 2014.
Drummond JL: Degradation, fatigue, and failure of resin dental composite materials, J Dent Res 87:710–719, 2008.
Ferracane JL: Resin composite—state of the art, Dent Mater 27:29–
38, 2011.
This review concludes that in 2010, the commercial materials available to the dental profession were of high quality and when used
appropriately have proven to deliver excellent clinical outcomes of
adequate longevity.
Gaengler P, Hoyer I, Montag R: Micromorphological evaluation of posterior composite restorations—a 10-year report, J Oral Rehabil 31:991–
1000, 2004.
Gallegos LL, Nicholls JI: In vitro two-body wear of three veneering resins,
J Prosthet Dent 60:172–178, 1988.
Three veneering resins were tested for wear. A significant difference in
wear against porcelain was found among the three resins, but no difference in wear was found against enamel.
Hilton TJ, Ferracane JL, Broome J (editors): Summitt’s Fundamentals of
Operative Dentistry: A Contemporary Approach, 4th ed, 2013, Chicago,
Quintessence.
The technical procedures used in the placement of resin-based composites in various types of restorations are discussed and illustrated.
Many clinical illustrations are included that show the variety of applications for dental composites.
Joniot SB, Gregoire GL, Auther AM, et al: Three dimensional optical profilometry analysis of surface states obtained after finishing sequences
for three resin-based composites, Oper Dent 25:311–315, 2000.
Khurana S, Rammal S, Ben-Jonathan N: Exposure of newborn male and
female rats to environmental estrogens: Delayed and sustained hyperprolactinemia and alterations in estrogen receptor expression, Endocrinology 141:4512–4517, 2000.
Kramer N, Reinelt C, Frankenberger R: Ten-year clinical performance
of posterior resin composite restorations, J Adhes Dent 17:433–441,
2015.
Lambrechts P, Braem M, Vanherle G: Evaluation of clinical performance
for posterior resin-based composites and dentin adhesives, Oper Dent
12:53–58, 1987.
These authors have been leaders in the clinical evaluation of resin systems. This paper is a superb treatment of the subject and emphasizes the
limitations of current adhesives and composites.
Lutz F, Phillips RW: A classification and evaluation of composite resin
systems, J Prosthet Dent 50:480–488, 1983.
This article presents a structure-based classification scheme for composites, one that has been almost universally accepted since its publication. Knowledge of the structure makes it possible to make decisions
as to the inherent properties and selection for specific situations. (See
also Willems et al., 1992.)
Malhotra N, Mala K: Light-curing considerations for resin-based
composite materials: a review. Part I, Compend Contin Educ Dent
31(7):498–505, 2010, ibid, Part II, 31(8):584–591, 2010.
These articles provide an excellent overview of the performance and
limitations of four types of curing lights for resin-based composites:
LED, QTH, PAC, and laser curing. The type of curing light and curing mode impact the polymerization kinetics of resin-based composite
(RBC) materials. They also affect the polymerization shrinkage and
associated stresses, microhardness, depth of cure, degree of conversion, and color change of RBCs. These factors can also influence the
microleakage in an RBC restoration. Apart from the type of unit and
mode used, the polymerization of RBCs is also affected by how a
light-curing unit is used and handled, as well as the aspects associated
with RBCs and the environment. Part II discusses the various clini114.e1

cal issues that should be considered while curing RBC restorations in
order to achieve the best possible outcome.
Manhart J, Chen HY, Hamm G, et al: Review of the clinical survival of
direct and indirect restorations in posterior teeth of the permanent
dentition, Oper Dent 29:481–508, 2004.
These reviewers surveyed the literature from about 1990 to 2004 to
assess the longevity of restorations in stress-bearing posterior cavities,
and possible reasons for clinical failure. Indirect resin restorations
were found to have lower annual failure rates than direct restorations
(P = 0.0031). Principal reasons for failure were secondary caries, fracture, marginal deficiencies, wear, and postoperative sensitivity.
Manhart J, Chen HY, Hickel R: The suitability of packable resin-based
composites for posterior restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 132:639–645,
2001.
Manhart J, Kunzelmann K-H, Chen HY, et al: Mechanical properties of
new composite restorative materials, J Biomed Mater Res (A) 53:353–
361, 2000.
An evaluation of the new class of hybrid composites known as “packable” or “condensable.” These authors demonstrate that although the
handling character of these materials is analogous to that of lathe-cut
amalgams, they do not offer any other advantage compared with other
hybrid composites as restorative resins.
Naciff JM, Jump ML, Torontalli SM, et al: Gene expression profile
induced by 17 alpha-ethynyl estradiol, bisphenol A and genistein
in the developing female reproductive system of the rat, Toxicol Sci
68:184–199, 2002.
Nagakane K, Yoshida Y, Hirata I, et al: Analysis of chemical interaction
of 4-MET with hydroxyapatite using XPS, Dent Mater J 25:645–649,
2006.
Olea N, Pulgar R, Perez P, et al: Estrogenicity of resin-based composites
and sealants used in dentistry, Environ Health Perspect 104:298–305,
1996.
Opdam NJM, Bronkhorst EM, Roeters JM, et al: A retrospective clinical
study on longevity of posterior composite and amalgam restorations,
Dent Mater 23:2–8, 2007.
Paris F, Balaguer P, Terouanne B, et al: Phenylphenols, biphenols, bisphenol-A and 4-tert-octylphenol exhibit alpha and beta estrogen activities
and antiandrogen activity in reporter cell lines, Mol Cell Endocrinol
193:43–49, 2002.
This article concludes that the environmental chemicals studied may have
a negative impact on androgen action during fetal and postnatal life.
Peterson J, Rizk M, Hoch M, et al: Bonding performance of self-adhesive flowable composites to enamel, dentin and a nano-hybrid
composite, Odontology 106:171–180, 2018.
Price RB, Felix CM, Whalen JM: Factors affecting the energy delivered to simulated class I and class V preparations, J Can Dent Assoc
76(A94):1–9, 2010.
Price RB, Labrie D, Whalen JM, et al: Effect of distance on irradiance and
beam homogeneity from four light-emitting diode curing units, J Can
Dent Assoc 77:B9, 2011.
These two articles by Price et al. present an analysis of both technical
variations among curing lamps and human operator variables on clinical outcomes and implications for best practice techniques.
Ramos RP, Chinelatti MA, Chimello DT, et al: Assessing microleakage in resin composite restorations rebounded with a surface sealant
and three low-viscosity resin systems, Quintessence Int 33:450–456,
2002.
Raskin A, Michotte-Theall B, Vreven J, et al: Clinical evaluation of a posterior composite 10-year report, J Dent 27:13–19, 1999.
Roulet J-F: Degradation of Dental Polymers, 1987, Basel and New York,
Karger.
A thorough discussion is presented of the chemistry and composition of modern dental restorative resins. Emphasis is placed on how
composition and clinical usage influence the longevity of a restorative
material in vivo.

114.e2

Roulet J-F: The problems associated with substituting resin-based composites for amalgam: a status report on posterior composites, J Dent
16:101, 1988.
A comprehensive review is presented of the factors to be considered in
the use of posterior composites as an alternative to dental amalgam.
The author concludes that the indications for posterior composites
are very limited.
Rueggeberg FA: An Expert’s Buying Guide for Curing Lights. ADA Professional Product Review 4, Chicago, IL, 2009, American Dental Association, pp 13–16.
Schafer TE, Lapp CA, Hanes CM, et al: Estrogenicity of bisphenol A and
bisphenol A dimethacrylate in vitro, J Biomed Mater Res 45:192–197,
1999.
Setcos JC, Tarim B, Suzuki S: Surface finish produced on resin composites by new polishing systems, Quintessence Int 30:169–173, 1999.
Shimizu T, Kitano T, Inoue M, et al: Ten-year longitudinal clinical evaluation of a visible light cured posterior composite resin, Dent Mater J
14:120–134, 1995.
Trujillo-Lemon M, Ge J, Lu H, et al: Dimethacrylate derivatives of dimer
acid, J Polym Sci: Part A Polym Chem 44:3921–3929, 2006.
Article on N’Durance, a high-molecular-weight, phase-separating
dicarbamate with composite resin having hydrophobic side chains.
van de Sande FH, Rodolpho PA, Basso GR, et al: 18-Year survival of
posterior composite resin restorations with and without glass ionomer
cement as base, Dent Mater 31:669–675, 2015.
van Dijken JW, Pallesen U: A randomized 10-year prospective follow-up
of class II nanohybrid and conventional hybrid resin composite restorations, J Adhes Dent 16:585–592, 2014.
van Dijken JW, Pallesen U: Posterior bulk-filled resin composite restorations: A 5-year randomized controlled clinical study, J Dent
51:29–35, 2016.
van Dijken JWV, Pallesen U, Benetti A: A randomized controlled
evaluation of posterior resin restorations of an altered resin modified glass-ionomer cement with claimed bioactivity, Dent Mater
35:335–343, 2019.
Wang R, Shi Y, Li T, et al: Adhesive interfacial characteristics and the
related bonding performance of four self-etching adhesives with different functional monomers applied to dentin, J Dent 62:72–80,
2017.
Weinmann W, Thalacker C, Guggenberger R: Siloranes in dental composites, Dent Mater 21:68–74, 2005.
Wendt SL Jr, Leinfelder KF: The clinical evaluation of heat-treated composite resin inlays, J Am Dent Assoc 120:177–181, 1990.
One of a few papers available that report the clinical performance of
heat-polymerized composite inlays. Although marginal integrity was
superior, no difference was detected in wear resistance compared with
light-cured inlays.
Wilder AD Jr, May KN Jr, Bayne SC, et al: Seventeen-year clinical study
of ultraviolet-cured posterior composite class I and II restorations,
J Esthet Dent 11:135–142, 1999.
Willems G, Lambrechts P, Braem M, et al: A classification of dental composites according to morphological and mechanical characteristics,
Dent Mater 81:310–319, 1992.
A classification scheme for composites, based on structure, that revises
and updates the earlier one of Lutz and Phillips (1983).
Wolter H, Storch W, Ott H: New inorganic/organic copolymers (ORMOCERS) for dental applications, Mat Res Soc Symp Proc 346:143–149, 1994.
Wu J, Mather RT: POSS polymers: Physical properties and biomaterials
applications, J Macromol Sci R, Part C: Polymer Rev 49:25–63, 2009.
Yap AUJ, Sau CW, Lye KW: Effects of finishing/polishing time on surface
characteristics of tooth-colored restoratives, J Oral Rehabil 25:456–
461, 1998.
Yap AUJ, Wong ML, Lim AC: The effect of polishing systems on microleakage of tooth-coloured restoratives. Part 2: Composite and polyacidmodified resin-based composites, J Oral Rehabil 27:205–210, 2000.

