12

Dental Implants
OUTLINE
History of Dental Implants

Implant Biomaterials

Classification of Implants

Selecting an Implant System

Implant Components

Biocompatibility of Implants

Implant Surgical Placement

Biomechanics

Evaluation of Clinical Success

Summary

KEY TERMS
Alloplastic Related to implantation of an inert foreign body.
Ankylosis A condition of joint or tooth immobility resulting from
oral pathology, surgery, or direct contact with bone.
Bioacceptance The ability to be tolerated in a biological environment in spite of adverse effects.
Bioactive Capable of promoting the formation of hydroxyapatite
and bonding to bone.
Endosteal implant A device placed into the alveolar and/or basal
bone of the mandible or maxilla that transects only one cortical
plate.
Epithelial implant A device placed within the oral mucosa.
Implantation The process of grafting or inserting a material
such as an inert foreign body (alloplast) or tissue within
the body.

Micromotion The displacement of the implant root relative to the
bone when the implant is loaded as a result of lack of friction or
bone integration.
Osseointegration The process by which living bony tissue forms
to within 100 Å of the implant surface without any intervening
fibrous connective tissue.
Osteoinductive Ability to promote bone formation through a
mechanism that induces the differentiation of osteoblasts.
Replantation Reinsertion of a tooth back into its jaw socket soon
after intentional extraction or accidental removal.
Subperiosteal implant A dental device that is placed beneath the
periosteum and overlies cortical bone.
Transosteal implant A device that penetrates both cortical plates
and the thickness of alveolar bone.

The restoration and replacement of missing teeth are important
aspects of modern dentistry. As teeth are lost to decay, disease,
and trauma, there is a demand for improvement of esthetics and
restoration of function.
Conventional methods of restoration include a removable complete denture, a removable partial denture, a fixed prosthesis, or combinations of these approaches. There are different indications for each
method, with associated advantages and disadvantages. Removable
dentures have long been considered problematic because of their
varying mobility/stability over time and the inconvenience of removing them each day. Also, many removable dentures were bulky, others
complicated chewing, and some were not adequately esthetic. Fixed
prostheses were considered more esthetic and comfortable for the
patient, but they involved the preparation of adjacent teeth and were
associated with problems such as secondary decay or irreversible pulpitis. If the adjacent teeth did not have restorations, the decision to
prepare them for a fixed prosthesis was difficult because two or more
natural teeth would have to be surgically altered to provide retention
for one or more artificial teeth (a bridge).
For centuries people have attempted to replace missing teeth
by implanting synthetic and natural substances. Implantation has

been defined as the insertion of any object or material, such as an
alloplastic substance or other tissue, either partially or completely, into
the body for therapeutic, diagnostic, prosthetic, or experimental purposes. Implantation is usually differentiated from other, similar procedures, such as replantation and transplantation. Replantation refers to
the reinsertion of a tooth back into its jaw socket after its accidental or
intentional removal, whereas transplantation is the transfer of a body
part (homogeneous or heterogeneous) from one host to another.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How did the concept of implantation evolve into a widely used restorative
technique in dentistry?

History of Dental Implants
Dental implants began as far back as the early Greek, Etruscan,
and Egyptian civilizations, employing various designs and materials ranging from jade and other stones and metals to bone and
ivory. Some of the design concepts used then have evolved into
the implants of today.
253

254

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

Seashells were used in place of teeth in 600 CE, evidence of
which was found in Honduras, and tooth restorations made of
jade and turquoise were found in Mayan skulls. Albucasis de Condue (936–1013) of France used ox bone to replace missing teeth;
this was one of the early documented placements of implants.
Through the centuries, various tooth transplants made of either
human or animal teeth were tested. These transplants became status symbols, and they quickly replaced other artificial alternatives
for restoring missing teeth. Toward the 18th century, Pierre Fauchard and John Hunter further documented tooth transplantation
and specified conditions for the success of this procedure. They
claimed that success was greater with anterior teeth, premolar
teeth, and transplants placed in young people with healthy tooth
sockets. Failure was believed to be the result of the incompatibility
of the type of tooth used or the lack of conformity of the tooth
to the socket.
The recognition of failure rates of transplants increased interest in the implantation of artificial tooth roots. In 1809 Maggiolo fabricated gold roots that were fixed to teeth by means of a
spring. These gold implants were placed into fresh extraction sites,
although they were not truly submerged into bone. The crowns
were placed after healing had occurred around the implant. Many
attempts followed. Harris (1887) proposed the use of a platinum
post coated with lead. The post was shaped like a tooth root,
and the lead was roughened for retention in the socket. Bonwell
(1895) implanted gold or iridium tubes to restore a single tooth
or support complete dentures. Payne (1898) implanted a silver
capsule as a foundation for a porcelain crown that was cemented
weeks after. Scholl (1905) demonstrated a porcelain corrugated
root-shaped implant that lasted for 2 years and was anchored to
adjacent teeth by pins. Greenfield (1913) introduced and patented a hollow “basket” implant made of a meshwork of 24-gauge
iridium-platinum wires soldered with 24-karat gold. This device
was used to support single implants and fixed dental prostheses
(FDPs) comprising as many as eight implants.
Consistent problems with these artificial implant designs and
materials supported the need for a scientific approach to implant
selection and placement. Some have proposed that the “modern
era” started in 1925 with the invention of the tubular extension
implant by H. Leger Dorez. This implant allowed for an expansion of the screw in bone, leading to actual bone anchorage and
initial stability. In 1937 Venable et al. investigated the interactions
of cobalt alloy and other available metals and alloys with bone for
use in dentistry. They concluded that certain metals produced a
galvanic reaction, which led to corrosion when these metals contacted tissue fluids. They proposed the use of Vitallium, a cast
alloy, which was composed of cobalt, chromium, and molybdenum. This alloy was considered to be relatively inert, compatible
with living tissue, and resistant to the adverse reactions with body
fluids. Vitallium has also been used in different forms of surgical devices, such as dental subperiosteal implant and orthopedic plates, screws, nails, and joints. Early evaluations documented
Vitallium implants with survival times of 10 or more years.
The background of research, development, and applications
of biomaterials for dental implants began with the application
of available substances, often of metallic origin. Some separate
the period before 1950 as an era of applications driven by need
and availability. Examples include the early use of wires, pins,
and rods fabricated from gold and other noble metals and alloys.
In the 1950s, the cobalt-based alloys were cast and finished for
subperiosteal and some root-form designs. The austenitic ironbased stainless steels constituted from iron-chromium and nickel

(sometimes with molybdenum as well) were also used in wrought
and machined conditions. Within a decade, titanium and other
reactive-group metals—plus carbons, ceramics, and eventually
polymers—were considered.
The more “modern” era of biomaterials arose by the 1970s,
when materials known and tested in many disciplines were constituted, fabricated, and finished as biomaterials. Consensus standards rapidly evolved for these biomaterials, which resulted in more
consistent control of their properties. A very important aspect of
this evolution—which included biomaterials, designs, and clinical
application—was the clinical research led by P. I. Brånemark in
Sweden. His studies used unalloyed titanium, now known as commercially pure titanium (CPTi); a root-form design; and very controlled conditions for surgery, restoration, and maintenance. Data
presented in literature reviews and consensus conferences over the
period 1972 to 2002 have demonstrated significant improvements
in dental implant survival statistics. When outcomes were evaluated by objective criteria, the average survival at 5 years was about
50% in the 1970s. Since the 2000s, average survival at 10 years
has been above 90% for these types of implants.

Classification of Implants
Implants can be classified according to anatomical location and
device design, implant properties, or implant attachment mechanism.

Anatomical Location and Implant Device Design
The first and most commonly used type of design is the endosteal
(also called endosseous) implant, a device placed into an alveolar
and/or basal bone of the mandible or maxilla that usually transects
only one cortical plate. These implants were formed in many different shapes, such as root-form cylindrical cones or screws. They
also came as thin plates called plate or blade forms and were used
in all areas of the mouth. One example of an endosteal implant
was called the blade implant (Figure 12-1), which was developed
independently in 1967 by two groups led initially by Roberts
(1970) and Linkow (1968). Endosteal blade implants consisted of
thin plates placed into bone; they were most commonly used for
narrow anatomical structures, such as posterior edentulous areas,
after significant resorption of bone. Because of various issues with
blade implants, their application in more recent implantology has
decreased. Another example of an endosteal implant was the ramus
frame implant (Figure 12-2), a horseshoe-shaped stainless-steel
device inserted into the ascending rami (bilateral) and the anterior
symphysis area of the mandible. As with the blade implants, the
number of applications was limited. The most popular endosteal
implant has been the root-form (Figure 12-3), which was designed
initially to mimic the shape of tooth roots for directional load
distribution and for positioning in bone. In longitudinal studies,
the root-form implant has the most documentation of the endosteal implants, although several surgical stages may be needed for
completion.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the indications for the use of mini-implants in dental practice?

A mini-implant is a type of endosteal implant with some indications in dentistry. More notably, their use in orthodontics for
appliance anchorage has increased. Other uses include overdenture

CHAPTER 12

A

Dental Implants

255

• Figure 12-2 Ramus frame blade implant that traverses entire mandible
and attaches to ramus.

B
• Figure 12-1 A, Blade implants embedded in bone, with some bone
loss. B, Failed blade implant prosthesis that was also attached to natural
teeth. (Courtesy Dr. Mickey Calverley.)

retention in areas where there is minimal bone available or in areas
that are narrow. They can also be used to anchor temporary prostheses in the case of overdentures on an arch with newly extracted
teeth. These implants were initially used as temporary implants,
which helped anchor the prosthesis while the larger-diameter
implants were left to osseointegrate. They could then be removed
once the final prosthesis was fabricated. Over time, the success
of these mini-implants has led to their evolution as final restorations for compromised cases. The diameter of mini-implants
ranges from 1.8 to 2.9 mm (Figure 12-4). Most mini-implants
can be placed without having to reflect a flap in the gingival tissue
because of their small diameter. Mini-implants are also designed
for immediate loading, offering the convenience of few visits
and allowing the patients to have their prosthesis immediately.
Although these implants are essentially made from the same material as the larger standard implants and are constructed as rootform implants, the main difference lies in their smaller diameter.
This smaller size allows placement of these implants in areas where
standard implants would normally require a bone-grafting procedure, which results in additional trauma and expense to patients.
As the applications of mini-implants continue to grow, they are
slowly being incorporated for use with FDPs, adding additional
support in the pontic areas.
The second implant design is the subperiosteal implant
(Figure 12-5), which employs an implant substructure and

superstructure. The custom-cast frame was placed directly beneath
the periosteum overlying and fitting along the bony cortex. This
implant was first developed by Dahl (1943) and refined by
Berman (1950), who used a direct-bone-impression technique.
These devices were used to restore partially dentate or completely
edentulous jaws when there was inadequate bone for endosseous implants. Use of the subperiosteal implant has been limited
because of numerous considerations, including the difficulty of
retrieval.
The third design is the transosteal implant (Figure 12-6),
which combines subperiosteal and endosteal components. This
type of implant penetrates both cortical plates and passes through
the full thickness of the alveolar bone. Use of the transosteal
implant has been restricted to the anterior area of the mandible
and provides support for tissue-borne overdentures. The concept
of transosseous implants was first conceived in Germany in the
early 1930s; early examples were made of a cobalt alloy. Small
(1968) developed the mandibular staple implant made of a titanium alloy, which was modified by Bosker (1983), who produced
the transmandibular implant (TMI) made of a gold alloy. Other
names for transosteal implants have included staple bone implant,
mandibular staple implant, and transmandibular implant.
The fourth implant design is the epithelial implant, which
is inserted into the oral mucosa. This type was associated with
a simple surgical technique where the mucosa was used as an
attachment site for metal inserts placed into an acrylic denture.
Several disadvantages are associated with the epithelial implant,
most notably a painful healing process and a requirement for continuous wear. The current use of “mucosal inserts” or epithelial
implants is very limited.
Some oral implantologists also include the endodontic stabilizer as an anatomy-specific application system. These smooth
or threaded pins (or screws) were placed through endodontically
treated teeth with the implant extending into the bone. They were
constructed from alloys or ceramics made of alumina or zirconia.
Reported difficulties included sealing the transition zone from
tooth to bone and the limited strength of small-diameter pins or
screws.
From a historical and applications perspective, these systems
were reviewed by Natiella et al. (1972) and subsequently in each
decade by researchers who participated in professional society–
based consensus conferences. To summarize the various biomaterials and designs tested for dental implants, examples of devices

256

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

A

B

C

• Figure 12-3 A, Endosteal implants are placed directly into bone; they mimic root forms for proper placement and location in bone. B and C, Restored anterior implant blending well with adjacent teeth. (B and
C, Courtesy Drs. Will Martin and Luiz Gonzaga.)

• Figure 12-4 Mini-implants used for orthodontic anchorage, showing
2-mm diameter of the mini-implants compared with the 4-mm diameter
of standard implants.

and fabrication of the prosthesis. For example, the elastic modulus of the implant is inversely related to the strain present at the
implant–tissue interface during loading of the implant; that is, the
greater the elastic modulus of an implant, the greater the stress in
the implant and the lower the stress distributed to bone.
An implant material with an elastic modulus comparable to
that of bone should be selected to produce a more uniform stress
distribution across the interface. Ductility is another important
property because this relates to the potential for some plastic deformation of abutments or fixtures without fracture in areas where
there is high tensile stress. Metals possess both high strength and
ductility, whereas the ceramics and carbons are brittle materials.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
received for examination prior to 1990 are shown in Figures 12-7
through 12-9.

What is the preferred implant-to-tissue interaction? How has this influenced
the popularity of implant applications?

Implant Properties

Implant Attachment Mechanism

Implant biomaterials can also be classified according to their composition and their physical, mechanical, chemical, electrical, and
biological properties. These classifications often include ranked
comparisons of properties, such as elastic moduli, tensile strength,
yield strength, and ductility, to determine optimal clinical applications (Table 12-1). These properties are used to aid in the design

Periodontal structures, which attach teeth to bone, consist of
highly differentiated fibrous tissue. These fibers are replete with
numerous cells and nerve endings that allow for functional force
transfer, sensory function, bone formation, and tooth movements.
Although this is the ideal form of integration, there are no known
implant biomaterials or designs at present that can stimulate the

CHAPTER 12

Dental Implants

257

A
A

B
B
• Figure 12-6 A, Panoramic radiograph of a transosteal implant showing perforation of both cortical plates, hence the name staple implant.
B, Transmucosal abutment for transosteal implant allowing for placement of
denture restoration. (Courtesy Dr. Joseph Cain and Dr. Richard Seals.)

C
• Figure 12-5 A, Subperiosteal implant positioned beneath the periosteum. Impression making often requires a difficult surgical technique.
B, Superstructure for subperiosteal implant allowing for attachment of
prosthesis. C, Denture prosthesis for subperiosteal implant. (Courtesy
Dr. Joseph Cain and Dr. Richard Seals.)

growth of these fibers and can fully mimic the function of the
periodontal ligament and a natural tooth.
In the past, implant attachment to fibrous connective tissue was
accepted as a measure of successful implant function (the pseudoligament concept). This type of interaction was reported to be very
susceptible to acute or chronic inflammatory responses, which were
accompanied by pain and eventual loss of the implant. This type
of attachment has also been called a pseudoperiodontium. Despite
numerous reports of implant success, clinical studies indicate that
this type of interaction is susceptible to progressive loosening and
infection, with subsequent loss of the implant construct.
In contrast to the pseudoperiodontium, the implant-to-bone
interaction (called osseointegration) is characterized by direct
contact between bone and the surface of a functional implant
after 1 year. This central theme of the Brånemark group was called

“direct anchorage to bone” and has become a major attribute of
dental implants. This mode is described as the direct adaptation of bone to implants without any other intermediate nonbony tissue and has been described by some as similar to tooth
ankylosis, where no periodontal ligament or fibrous tissue exists.
The strength of this contact has been shown to be stable, which
is advantageous compared with the soft tissue interface described
previously.
This type of osseous interface has been described extensively
and includes a process wherein bone-producing cells migrate along
the implant surface through the connective tissue scaffolding that
forms adjacent to the implant surface. Integration at the implant
interface is highly dependent on the implant surface’s chemistry
and design. Bone apposition has been reported at higher rates
when microscopic surface ridges are present. Osseous integration
has also been achieved through the use of bioactive materials that
stimulate the formation of bone along the surface of the implant.
Another way of achieving osseous integration involves de novo
bone formation, wherein a mineralized interfacial matrix and/or
active growth factors are deposited along the implant’s surface.
The implant’s surface topography and chemistry influence the
bone development around the implant.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the implication of having direct bone contact and the absence of a
periodontal ligament on the prosthetic superstructure?

258

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

• Figure 12-7 Collection of endosteal blade implant designs for restoring single or adjacent teeth.

• Figure 12-8 Collection of endosteal implants for partial arch restorations.

• Figure 12-9 Collection of different designs and materials used for endosseous implants.

Implant-supported restorations differ from tooth-supported
restorations in that the former lack a periodontal ligament, which
reduces shear stress and strain, provides shock absorption, and
reduces the development of dangerously high occlusal forces.
The benefits of the periodontal ligament reduce the potential for

inadvertent damage to the tooth or restoration. Ceramic materials are brittle by nature, and because of inherent processing flaws,
they cannot withstand any stress above their yield point, which is
equivalent to their tensile strength. These stresses can be generated during occlusal loading. Implants, on the other hand, are
directly anchored to the bone and cannot readily flex laterally
under extremely high occlusal loads to relieve some of the excessive loading. Vult von Steyern et al. (2005) analyzed the fracture
strength of all-ceramic prostheses on abutment teeth and implants
in vitro. They concluded that implant-supported ceramic prostheses fractured at higher loads than those supported by natural teeth
because of the lack of a periodontal ligament. This indicates that
the supporting structures, in this case the implants, are subjected
to higher stress levels. However, clinical studies have shown that
the complication rate for implant-supported FDPs is 30% over 5
years, whereas that for tooth-supported FDPs is 27.6% over the
same time period, indicating no real difference in survival of the
restoration between the two types of support.
Conversely, studies have analyzed whether the type of prosthetic material can affect the longevity of an implant. Brånemark
and Skalak advocated the use of acrylic for the prosthetic superstructure to act as a shock absorber and essentially dissipate the
load on the implants and the bone surrounding them. Acrylic,
noble metal alloys, and ceramic are being used in implant superstructures. In the absence of a periodontal ligament, minimizing
the load along the bone–implant interface is logical. However,

CHAPTER 12

TABLE 12-1

Dental Implants

259

Mechanical Properties and Density of Metallic and Ceramic Implant Materials

Material

Grade or Condition

Yield Strength
(MPa)

Elongation (%)

Modulus of
Elasticity (GPa)

Tensile Strength
(MPa)

Density (g/cm3)

CP titanium

1

170

24

102

240

4.5

2

275

20

102

345

4.5

3

380

18

102

450

4.5

4

483

15

104

550

4.5

Ti-6AI-4 V

860

10

113

930

4.4

Ti-6AI-4 V ELI

795

10

113

860

4.4

Ti-15Zr

953

Co-Cr-Mo

103.7

Cast

450

8

240

700

8.0

Annealed

190

40

200

490

8.0

Cold-worked

690

12

200

860

8.0

Stainless steel
*

Aluminum oxide

Polycrystalline

400 (500/flexure)

0.1

380

220

3.96

Zirconium oxide

Y2O3 (stabilized)

1200 (flexure)

0.1

200

350

6.0

Cortical bone

N/A

1

18

140

0.7

Dentin

N/A

0

18.3

52

2.2

Enamel

N/A

0

84

10

3.0

*

ASTM Standard: minimum values.

there is no evidence to associate the use of any prosthetic material
with the longevity and survival of the implants.

CRITICAL QUESTION

& 3URVWKHVLV

What is the purpose of pretreating implant surfaces?

% $EXWPHQW

Implant Components
To understand the material characteristics and function of an
implant, one must first be knowledgeable about the numerous
component parts. Although each implant system varies, the
parts are basically consistent. The body of the implant (called
a fixture for the Brånemark system) (Figure 12-10, A) is the
implant component that engages with bone. Depending on the
implant system, the body section can have different surfaces—
threaded, grooved, perforated, plasma-sprayed, sand-blasted, or
coated. These characteristics are often classified as subtraction
(threading, grooves, perforations, sand-blasting, or acid-etching)
or addition (plasma spray and coating) types. Each surface type
is meant to enhance bone integration and primary stability; that
is, increased surface area enhances bone integration, and better
cortex engagement plays an important role in immediate and
long-term bone anchorage. The coated or plasma-sprayed biomaterials, discussed later in this chapter, are used to enhance
attachment to bone. The second component (Figure 12-10, B)
is the transmucosal abutment, which provides the connection

$ ,PSODQW
IL[WXUH

• Figure 12-10 Diagram of implant components. A, The implant fixture
(endosteal root-form). B, Transmucosal abutment serving as the attachment between fixture and the actual prosthesis. C, The actual prosthesis,
which can either be cemented, screwed, or swaged.

260

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

between the implant body and the intraoral prosthesis to be fabricated (Figure 12-10, C), which will provide intraoral function.
The abutment is usually connected to the implant body by means
of a screw; however, the abutment can also be cemented or connected by a Morse taper-type design. Abutments can become
engaged to the implant body either by an internal or external
geometry (initially a hexagon) within the implant body, which
also serves as an antirotation device and is particularly important for single-unit restorations. The last part of an implant is
the prosthesis. The prosthesis can be attached to the abutments
through the use of screws, cement, precision attachments, magnets, or other designs, such as those used for removable implant
overdentures.

Implant Surgical Placement
Placement and restoration of implants intended to integrate with
bone are usually performed in stages. The first stage, or stage 1,
occurs when the implant is surgically placed into the bone (Figure
12-11). The implant is left within the bone (passive) for a period of
months, depending on the bone quality, and allowed to heal and
become integrated. A secondary surgery, or stage 2, is sometimes
required whereby the implant is uncovered and exposed through
the oral environment (Figure 12-12). This exposure is performed

4 to 6 months after implant placement and after proper bone
healing has occurred.
The restorative phase then follows the placement of abutments
and a crown, a partial denture, or a removable denture, with or
without a bar construct. Some implant systems use only one surgical intervention, where the implant is immediately placed in contact with the oral environment and is sometimes able to function
in a limited way within days. Some of these systems have even
been advocated for immediate functional loading, with reports of
relative success.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
When can an implant restoration be considered successful? What criteria
are used to determine this success? What clinical situations can affect the
success rate of dental implants?

Evaluation of Clinical Success
There have been several long-standing debates about what is
considered successful in implant dentistry. Some consider that
the encapsulation of an implant with a pseudoperiodontium is
a successful implant condition. The most frequently cited success

B

A

C

• Figure 12-11 Implant placement, Stage 1 surgery. A, Sequential twist drills used for osteotomy. B, Depth
pins used to confirm osteotomy and implant parallelism. C, Implant placement following the correct angulation. (Courtesy Dr. Luiz Gonzaga.)

A

B

C

• Figure 12-12 Implant placement, Stage 2 surgery. A, Tissue evaluation pre uncovering. B, Healing
abutment on implant after uncovering. Minimal crestal incision, tissue punch or laser can be used as long
as keratinized mucosa is present. C, Impression coping on implant to facilitate fabrication of provisional
restoration at the same appointment. (Courtesy Dr. Luiz Gonzaga.)

CHAPTER 12

criteria from the 1970s are those in the publication edited by
Schnitman and Schulman (1979). More recently, summaries from
Cochran and Fritz (1996) and Albrektsson et al. (1986 and 1991)
are often cited.

Criteria of Success
Proposed early requirements included (1) implant mobility
less than 1 mm when tested clinically; (2) no evidence of x-ray
radiolucency; (3) bone loss less than one-third the height of the
implants; (4) absence of infection, damage to structures, and
violation of body cavities—inflammation, if present, must be
amenable to treatment; and (5) a success rate of 75% or more
after 5 years of functional service using objective criteria for
evaluation. As an example, these conditions were somewhat
different from the criteria of Albrektsson et al. (1986), which
included the following: (1) the implant must be immobile when
tested clinically; (2) there must be no evidence of periapical x-ray
radiolucency; (3) vertical bone loss should be less than 0.2 mm
annually following the implant’s first year; (4) absence of signs
and symptoms such as pain, infections, neuropathies, paresthesias, or violation of the mandibular canal; and (5) a success rate
of 85% or more at the end of a 5-year observation period and
80% at the end of a 10-year period when evaluated by objective
criteria for success.
Smith and Zarb (1989) recommended an addition to Albrektsson’s criteria by stating that the patient’s and dentist’s satisfaction
should be the primary consideration and that esthetic conditions
should be met. Patient satisfaction and patient attitude toward
the prosthesis have been included in some subsequent lists of criteria for success. Although these criteria have become more stringent in recent years, success in implant dentistry is still difficult
to quantify.
In 2008, the International Congress of Oral Implantologists
arrived at a consensus for rating implant success, survival, and failure. The scale ranges from 1 to 4, with 1 being deemed successful
and optimal health and 4 as clinical failure. The consensus evaluates the presence of pain or tenderness, mobility, bone loss, and
exudate history (Table 12-2).
Standardized criteria for success should continue to evolve to
enable proper evaluation of implant dentistry as the systems and
treatments change over time.

Evaluation of Failure
Most recently, there has been much focus on peri-implant diseases because the diagnosis of these has never been fully established. As such, implant failures resulting from peri-implantitis
range anywhere from 11% to 55%, and the true prevalence
of this disease is elusive. Peri-implantitis and perimucositis are
defined as mucosal inflammation surrounding the implant with
or without 2 mm or more of bone loss after restoration (implant
loading). The incidence of perimucositis and peri-implantitis on
patients who receive implants varies from 20% to 90% within
a period of 5 to 11 years. There are no definitive interventions
associated with successful therapy of peri-implant disease. With
more and more implants being placed in lieu of traditional
fixed and removable dental prosthesis to replace missing teeth,
peri-implantitis is becoming a major dental health issue. In
2017 the World Workshop on the Classification of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases and Conditions was convened
to outline proper identification of peri-implant diseases. The

TABLE 12-2

Dental Implants

261

International Congress of Oral
Implantologists Health Scale for Rating
the Success or Failure of Dental Implants

Quality Scale

Clinical Condition

I. Success

No pain or tenderness at function
0 mobility
<2-mm bone loss
No exudate history

II. Satisfactory

No pain or tenderness at function
0 mobility
2- to 4-mm bone loss
No exudate history

III. Compromised

May have pain or tenderness at function
0 mobility
>4-mm bone loss and <1/2 implant length
No exudate history

IV. Failure

Pain or tenderness at function
Mobility
Bone loss >1/2 implant length
Uncontrolled exudates
No longer in the mouth

From Misch CE, et al: Implant success survival and failure: International Congress of Oral
Implantologists, Pisa, Italy, Consensus Conference, Implant Dent 17:5–15, 2008.

diagnostic criteria for peri-implant diseases are shown in Table 12-3.
Although the causes of peri-implantitis and peri-mucositis are
still being investigated, there is a strong link between the incidence of the disease and chronic periodontitis, poor plaque
control, and absence of regular implant maintenance. The links
between systemic risk factors, such as smoking and diabetes,
were found to be inconclusive.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the primary mechanism of failure involved with dental implants?

Longevity of Dental Implants
The popularity of dental implants to restore full or partial
edentulism has been the result of predictable outcomes with
high success rates. Five-year success rates of 96% to 98% are
reported for mandibular implants and 94% to 96% for maxillary implants, depending on the quality of bone, surgical technique, and primary implant stability. Implant failure can occur
at an early stage or a late stage. Early-stage failures occur prior to
loading or placement of the prosthesis and are most commonly
associated with poor surgical techniques or inability to achieve
primary stability.
Brånemark and Albrektsson reported strict protocols required
to achieve proper osseointegration. These include following
proper aseptic techniques and allowing the bone to heal around
the implant for a period of 4 to 6 months. The healing process
allows the bone to be generated around the implant free from
bacteria and micromotion, which can disrupt bone deposition
around the implant. Micromotion above 150 μm has been shown
to promote soft tissue deposition and eventual encapsulation of
the implant body with fibrous tissue. This occurrence is classified

262

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

TABLE 12-3 Classification of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases and Conditions

Peri-Implant Soft Tissue Inflammation (Redness,
Swelling, Profuse Bleeding on Probing)

Additional Bone Loss After Initial
Healing

Probing Depth

Peri-implant health

None

None

None

Peri-implant
mucositis

Present with line or drop of bleeding within 30
seconds after probing

None

None

Peri-implantitis

Present

Radiographic evidence of bone loss
after initial healing*

Increased probing depth compared
with probing depth at delivery of
prosthesis

*

In the absence of baseline radiographs, a combination of bone loss ≥3 mm, bleeding on probing, and probing depth ≥6 mm is indicative of peri-implantitis.

as a failure of osseointegration. Allowing the bone surrounding
the implant to heal necessitates a two-step surgical technique for
implant placement, as mentioned earlier. In 1990 Schnitman
et al. reported on the success of immediate loading of dental
implants. This technique eliminates the need for a second surgery
and allows the implant to be used immediately to support a temporary or permanent prosthesis (Figure 12-13). There are mixed
results regarding the success rates between immediately loaded
and conventionally loaded implants. Although the success rates
vary, there is a consensus that immediate loading constitutes a
more technique-sensitive process and patient-selective endeavor.
Researchers conclude that if these guidelines are followed, the
success rates for immediately loaded implants are more favorable.
As with conventional implants, primary stability is important in
achieving proper osseointegration. The problem with immediately loading implants is that micromotion can occur and jeopardize the bone formation around the implant body. However,
research has shown that there is a range of allowable micromotion
from 30 to 150 μm, where bone deposition is not hindered. The
advantage of immediate loading is shorter treatment time, which
leads to greater patient convenience and comfort by reducing the
number of surgeries and allowing the immediate placement of a
prosthesis.
Late-stage failures occur after loading or placement of a prosthesis and can be the result of complications stemming from
uncontrolled periodontal disease or overloading of the implant.
Overloading can be caused by lateral or oblique forces exerted on
the prosthesis from improper occlusal loading or parafunctional
habits. Bone is susceptible to microfractures or fatigue fractures,
depending on the type and amount of occlusal load being exerted.
Once the bone reaches the tolerance limit for the occlusal loads,
these fractures can occur and can lead to implant failure. Excessive
bone deformation has been shown to occur between 2000 and
3000 microstrain units, and pathological overloading can be seen
at over 4000 microstrain units. One thousand (1000) microstrain
units equals 0.1% deformation.

which can, in turn, lead to bone resorption and microfracture.
Conversely, minimal load transfer to bone can lead to bone atrophy from disuse. Rough surfaces along the implant are typically
conducive to transferring more load to the bone as a result of the
increased surface-area contact. An increase in contact area also
reduces localized stress. This reduction in localized stress decreases
the strain around the implants. On the other hand, smooth-surfaced implants have the opposite effect, as evidenced by resorption
along the marginal areas, where there is a smooth transition from
the implant to bone.
The type of prosthesis used can also influence how the forces are
transferred along the implant–bone interfaces. Prosthesis design
should minimize long cantilever arms to avoid offset loads or high
bending moments on the implants. Lateral forces are not tolerated as well as direct axial loading. Cement-retained prostheses
have been found to be more favorable in maintaining proper axial
loading as opposed to screw-retained restorations. The absence of
a screw hole allows proper occlusal design for the prosthesis to
adequately direct loading to the implant. Conversely, the presence
of a screw hole will redirect occlusal forces and introduce bending
moments to the implant.

CRITICAL QUESTION

Metallic Implants

Which factors in the implant and prosthesis design affect the load transfer to
bone?

Three metallic-based systems have been used to make dental
implants: CPTi and titanium alloys, stainless steel, and cobaltchromium-molybdenum alloys. These metallic implants undergo
one or more of several surface treatments prior to final packaging
for implantation. Some of these modifications include passivation,
anodization, ion implantation, and texturing by several different

A delicate balance must be achieved in load transfer from
implant to bone to maintain proper bone health. Excessive occlusal forces lead to overloading of the bone surrounding the implant,

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which biomaterial is best for certain types of implants?

Implant Biomaterials
The most commonly used implant materials are made from metallic biomaterials. Implants also differ in their surface condition.
Some implants are machined and finished; others are coated with
different types of biomaterials. Of the four types of implants by
design, endosteal implants are the most commonly used for dental
applications. Thus the nature of the biomaterials used for endosteal implants is a central focus of the following discussion.

CHAPTER 12

Dental Implants

263

• Figure 12-13 Immediate placement of dental implants. A, Fractured maxillary central incisor seen radiographically. B, Central incisior extracted. C, Implant placed immediately after extraction. D, Temporary
abutment placed for temporary crown. E, Final restoration completed. (From Garg AK: Implant Dentistry,
ed 2, St. Louis, 2010, Mosby.)

methods. Passivation refers to the enhancement of the oxide layer
to minimize the release of metallic ions as a result of surface transfers. Minimization of ion release contributes to biocompatibility.
Passivation treatments can be performed through immersion in
40% nitric acid or anodization, a process by which an electrical current is passed through the implant when it is placed in a
specialized solution. The former method of treatment minimally
increases the thickness of the oxide layer, whereas the latter treatment can result in a thicker oxide layer, which has been shown
to be beneficial in enhancing corrosion resistance. Surface texturing increases the surface area of the implant and enhances
tissue interactions by increasing the area through which stresses
are transferred to bone. This is accomplished by several methods,
including plasma spraying, acid-etching, and blasting with aluminum oxide or another ceramic or ceramic-like material. Plasma
spraying involves melting materials under high temperatures and

then spraying the material onto the surface of the implant. This
method can be used with Ti or various ceramic coatings, as discussed later in this chapter. The increased implant surface area
should remain passive because a greater surface area influences
the overall release of metallic ions. Another surface modification
for the implant is ion implantation, which consists of bombarding the implant surface of the implant with high-energy ions up
to a surface depth of a few micrometers. This procedure has been
claimed to increase the corrosion resistance of the titanium alloys
through the formation of a titanium nitride (TiN) surface layer
if the ion is nitrogen.

Titanium and Titanium Alloy
Titanium exists in nature as rutile (TiO2) or ilmenite (FeTiO3)
compounds and requires specific extraction methods to be recovered in the elemental state. Titanium has several favorable physical

264

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

properties, which include a low density of 4.5 g/cm3 and a relatively high flexure strength comparable to that of cast forms of
cobalt and stainless-steel alloys. Titanium is very resistant to corrosion because of a passivating layer of titanium oxide, which is
formed instantly on the surface. A new oxide layer re-forms on the
surface as soon as this oxide is lost because of mechanical removal.
This oxide layer can slowly become thicker over time and can
reach a maximum of 25 nm in 4 years. In vitro, this layer can be
removed by using corrosive acids or ion-etching. Pure titanium
has the ability to form several oxides, including TiO, TiO2, and
Ti2O3. Of these, TiO2 is considered the most stable and is found
after exposure to physiological conditions.
The most commonly used titanium products are grades 1 to 4
of CPTi. Titanium alloys, namely, Ti-6Al-4V and Ti-6Al-7Nb, are
used in extra-low interstitial (ELI) grades. The ELI contains low
levels of oxygen dissolved in interstitial sites in the metal. Lower
amounts of oxygen and iron improve the ductility of the ELI titanium alloy, which can be alloyed with different elements to modify
its properties. As discussed in Chapter 9, Titanium Alloys, alloying elements can be added to titanium alloys to stabilize either the
α or β phase. Aluminum acts as an alpha stabilizer for the purpose
of increasing strength and decreasing density. Vanadium and niobium are beta-phase stabilizers, which are used to minimize the
formation of TiAl3 to approximately 6% or less and to decrease the
alloy’s susceptibility to corrosion. Except for CPTi, the modulus
of elasticity of Ti-6Al-4V is closer to that of bone than that of
any other widely used metallic implant biomaterial. Newer titanium alloys have been developed, including Ti-13Nb-13Zr and
Ti-15Mo-2.8Nb. These alloys use other phase stabilizers instead
of aluminum and vanadium and may exhibit greater strength and
corrosion resistance.
As listed previously, CPTi comes in different grades, from
CP grades I to IV. The compositions of these metals in weight
percentage are given in Table 12-4. The strength of CPTi is less
than that of Ti-6Al-4V alloy, although the modulus of elasticity values are comparable (Table 12-1). The table shows that Ti
alloys maintain the fine balance between sufficient strength to
resist fracture under occlusal forces and to retain a lower modulus of elasticity for more uniform stress distributions across the
bone–implant interface.
Most recently, binary alloys such as Ti-Nb, Ti-Hf, and Ti-Ta
have been examined for use as dental implants. Ti-15Zr was
introduced clinically under the trade name Roxolid (Straumann,
Basel, Switzerland) for use as narrow implants where regular-size

TABLE 12-4

implants are not indicated. The claim is that these alloys are
more biocompatible than the current Ti-6Al-4V alloy with the
elimination of Al and V, which have been known to cause cytotoxic reactions and chromosomal damage. The Roxolid demonstrates improved mechanical properties, with a tensile strength
of 953 MPa compared with 680 MPa for Ti-6Al-4V and 310
MPa for CPTi. There are limited studies on this material; however, these studies have shown that there is no cytotoxic behavior
associated with this alloy, there is greater bone–implant contact
(BIC) after 6 weeks of osseointegration, and it has similar elastic
characteristics with the Ti-6Al-4V with higher strength. As with
all implant materials, long-term clinical data are needed to fully
ascertain risks and benefits.

Stainless Steel
Used in the form of surgical austenitic steel, these metals have
18% chromium for corrosion resistance and 8% nickel to stabilize
the austenitic structure. Stainless steel is most often used in the
wrought and heat-treated state and possesses high strength and
ductility. Despite its low cost and ease of fabrication, this alloy is
not widely used in implant dentistry because of a potential allergic response to nickel and a susceptibility to crevice and pitting
corrosion. The corrosion products for stainless steel contain iron,
chromium, nickel, and molybdenum. These elements or their ions
can accumulate in the tissues surrounding the implant and subsequently be transported to other parts of the body to produce a
potentially unfavorable response. Surface treatments such as surface passivation and ion implantation are used to improve the corrosion resistance, although austenitic stainless steels are still prone
to localized attack in long-term applications.
Cobalt-Chromium-Molybdenum Alloy
This class of alloys generally consists of 63% cobalt, 30% chromium, and 5% molybdenum, with small amounts of carbon,
manganese, and nickel. Molybdenum is a stabilizer, chromium
provides the passivating effect to ensure corrosion resistance, and
carbon serves as a hardener. Vitallium is the representative material
of Co-Cr-Mo alloy, which was introduced by Venable in the late
1930s. This metal was initially shown to lack electrochemical activity and any tissue reaction. Ticonium, a Ni-Cr-Mo-Be alloy, was
also used as a dental implant material, although this alloy revealed
some adverse issues related to corrosion and biocompatibility. In
later studies, Vitallium was associated with chronic inflammation
and no osseous integration for several endosteal and subperiosteal

Composition of CP Titanium and Alloys (Percent by Weight)*

Titanium

N

C

H

Fe

O

Al

V

Ti

CP grade I

0.03

0.08

0.015

0.20

0.18

—

—

Balance

CP grade II

0.03

0.08

0.015

0.30

0.25

—

—

Balance

CP grade III

0.05

0.08

0.015

0.30

0.35

—

—

Balance

CP grade IV

0.05

0.08

0.015

0.5

0.4

—

—

Balance

Ti-6Al-4 V alloy

0.05

0.08

0.015

0.3

0.2

5.50–6.75

3.50–4.50

Balance

Ti-6Al-4 V (ELI alloy)

0.05

0.08

0.012

0.25

0.13

5.50–6.50

3.50–4.50

Balance

*

ASTM Standard: minimum values.

CHAPTER 12

designs. To improve implant performance, inert biomaterials in
the form of aluminum oxide and other ceramics were deposited
on alloy surfaces. Aluminum oxide and zirconium oxide coated
on cobalt alloys were found to have no effect on improving the
biological acceptability of the implants evaluated. Co-Cr-Mo
alloys have a high elastic modulus and resistance to corrosion.
The additions of ceramic coatings such as calcium phosphate did
not significantly alter the bulk portions of the alloy. Studies of
cobalt alloys have shown that their lower ductility is a result of
the agglomeration of compounds rich in carbon, chromium, and
molybdenum. Also, studies have shown that ductility is improved
by reducing the carbon content and controlling the processing of
the alloy. Co-Cr-Mo and stainless-steel alloys continue to be used
for some implants, such as subperiosteal and transosteal implants
and ramus frames, because of their castability, mechanical properties, and lower cost.

Ceramic and Ceramic-Like Coated Metal
Implant Systems
Several synthetic and biological materials have been used specifically for the treatment of bone defects, ridge augmentation, and
osteoporotic lesions. These biomaterials can either be plasmasprayed or blasted onto the metallic implant to produce ceramiclike surfaces, which can be more thermodynamically stable,
hydrophilic, nonconductive of heat and electricity, and bioactive
at the surface, thereby producing a high-strength integration with
bone and the surrounding tissues. The term bioactive refers to a
variety of inorganic biomaterials that can enhance integration
with bone. These are generally brittle and may have high elastic
moduli and low tensile strengths.
Recently, ceramic implants made from ytrria-stabilized zirconia
(3Y-TZP) were shaped into actual threaded implants and implant
abutments. Ceramic implants can withstand only relatively low
tensile or shear stresses induced by occlusal loads, but they can
tolerate quite high levels of compressive stress (Table 12-1).
Additionally, these implants have a more esthetic appearance
than titanium, with increased wear and corrosion resistance.
Aluminum oxide (Al2O3) is used as a standard biomaterial for
ceramic implants because of its inertness (biostability), with no
evidence of adverse in vivo reactions. Zirconia (ZrO2) has also
demonstrated a high degree of inertness. These types of ceramic
implants are not bioactive in that they do not promote the formation of bone. This property is double-edged because this also
minimizes bacterial affinity and therefore the incidence of periimplantitis (see following discussion). These materials have high
strength, stiffness, and hardness and function very well for some
designs of dental implants. However, there have been limited
clinical data on these zirconia implants, and some of the results
have been catastrophic, with early fracture being much higher
than the titanium implants for both the implants themselves and
the abutments.
Of the synthetic types of materials, calcium phosphates are
the most successful for grafting and bone augmentation. This
performance is probably associated with the fact that bone is
composed of 60% to 70% calcium phosphate. These materials
are nonimmunogenic and are biocompatible with host tissues.
The two most commonly used calcium phosphates are hydroxyapatite (HA) or Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2 and tricalcium phosphate
(TCP), Ca3(PO4)2. Hydroxyapatite and tricalcium phosphate
are used as bone-graft materials in granular or block form to

Dental Implants

265

serve as a template for the formation of new bone. Because these
materials are known to promote and achieve a direct bond of the
implant to hard tissues, they are classified as bioactive. Both also
promote vertically directed bone growth and a relatively strong
bond to bone.
Bioactivity is defined in the ninth edition of the Glossary of
Prosthodontic Terms as the “reactive potential of implant material
that allows interaction and bond formation with living tissues;
active potential depends on material composition, topography,
and chemical or physical surface variations.” More specifically,
the bioactivity of bone with an implanted material indicates the
bond of bone to hydroxyapatite. HA, TCP, and other calcium
phosphates are bioactive, in part, as a result of the release of calcium and phosphate ions within the surrounding tissue. Studies
have revealed several differences in the tissue response to these
materials after implantation. The beta form of TCP is resorbed
more rapidly than HA and results in a breakdown of TCP. Some
have reported a replacement of mesenchymal cells with features
resembling osteoprogenitor cells. Studies have also shown that
after 4 weeks of implantation, osteocytes accumulate adjacent
to HA granules, indicating the possibility of osteogenesis with
these implants. This is one of the justifications for using calcium phosphate compounds for coatings on implants placed
into bone.
The use of these calcium phosphates as coating biomaterials for
metallic implants is directly related to their physical and chemical properties. The more crystalline the HA coatings, the more
resistant they are to clinical dissolution. A minimum of 50% crystalline HA is considered a preferable concentration for coatings.
Dissolution of the coating occurs at a higher rate with the more
amorphous structural conditions. Heat treatment after the deposition process improves the crystallinity of HA. The major advantage of these ceramic-like coatings is that they can stimulate the
adaptation of bone and very often exhibit a more intimate boneto-implant contact compared with a metallic surface. The amount
of bone integration has been compared between metallic implants
and ceramic-coated implants in numerous studies; these studies
suggest that there is greater bone-to-implant integration with the
HA-coated implants during the early stages of osseointegration.
However, other studies indicate that there is no significant difference between the HA-coated and the uncoated implants after
longer observation periods.
The bioglasses (SiO2-CaO-Na2O-P2O5-MgO) are another
form of bioactive ceramic biomaterials. These materials are
known to form a carbonated hydroxyapatite layer in vivo as a
result of their calcium and phosphorus content. The formation
of this layer is initiated by the migration of calcium, phosphate,
silica, and sodium ions into tissue as a result of external pH
changes. A silica-rich gel layer forms on the surface as elements
are released. The silicon depletion initiates a migration of calcium
and phosphate ions to the silica gel layer from both the bioglass
surface and tissue fluids. This results in the formation of a calcium-phosphorus layer that stimulates osteoblasts to proliferate.
These osteoblasts produce collagen fibrils that become incorporated into the calcium-phosphorus layer and are later anchored
by the calcium-phosphorus crystals. This layer is 100 to 200 mm
thick and has been shown to form a strong bone–bioglass interface. Bioglasses are classified as bioactive materials because they
stimulate the formation of bone. They are more often used as
grafting materials for ridge augmentation or bony defects than
as coating materials for metallic implants because the interfacial
bond strength of bioglasses with the metallic substitute and other

266

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

ceramic substrates is weak and is subject to dissolution in vivo.
Despite their favorable osteoinductive ability, bioglasses are also
very brittle, which makes them unsuitable for use for some stressbearing implant applications.

where parts touch one another and galvanic corrosion might
exist. In general, the titanium and cobalt alloys are relatively
stable, and both have been combined electrochemically with the
high-noble dental alloys. Base metal and amalgam combinations
are a concern.

Other Implant Materials
Carbon and a carbon compound (C and SiC) were introduced in
the 1960s for use in dental implantology. Vitreous carbon, which
elicits a very minimal response from host tissues, is one of the
most biocompatible materials. Vitreous carbons are the result of
the controlled thermal degradation of a preformed polymeric solid
that leaves a relatively pure glassy carbon residue that possesses the
glassy and ceramic properties of graphite. Studies have confirmed
that the morphology of the bone–implant interface is similar to
that associated with an HA implant. Compared with the metallic implants, carbon is more inert under physiological conditions
and has a modulus of elasticity similar to that of dentin and bone.
Thus carbon deforms at a rate similar to those tissues, enhancing
the transmission of biomechanical forces. However, carbon is susceptible to fracture because of the brittleness and susceptibility of
this material under tensile stress in the presence of surface flaws,
which is usually generated as a component of flexural loading.
Carbon-based biomaterials have also been used for ceramic-like
coatings on metallic implants.

Critical Question
With the abundance of implant materials to choose from, how does a clinician
know which biomaterial is best for a particular implant application?

Selecting an Implant System
Because of the abundance of different implant biomaterials and
implant systems, knowing the indications for their use is important. Perhaps the most important consideration is the strength of
the implant biomaterial and the type of bone in which the implant
will be placed. The other factors to consider are the implant design,
abutment choices, abutment availability, surface finish, and biomechanical considerations of restorative treatments.

Characteristics of the Material
The strength of an implant is often a consideration, depending
on the area of placement. If the implant is located in a zone of
higher force transfer (e.g., in the posterior area of the arch), the
clinician might consider using a higher-strength material such as
grade IV CPTi or one of the titanium alloys. Some controversy
exists as to which titanium metal or alloy to use because some
researchers believe that aluminum and vanadium can be toxic if
released in sufficient quantities. Other considerations for selection include a history of implant fracture in the placement area
of interest, the use of narrower implants, and a history of occlusal or parafunctional habits. Anterior implants, which are designated for use in narrow spaces, have smaller diameters, in the
range of 3.25 mm or less. Conversely, single implants placed in
posterior areas have larger diameters, up to 7 or 8 mm. Selection
of the implant biomaterial must also be evaluated in terms of the
abutment and intraoral biomaterials and dental materials. Electrochemical studies of the corrosion of metals now provide lists
of acceptable and unacceptable combinations under conditions

CRITICAL QUESTION
How do implant characteristics and the quality and quantity of bone affect the
survival time of implants?

Characteristics of HA Coating
There has been much debate about when to use metallic or HAcoated implants. As mentioned earlier, HA-coated implants
stimulate bone growth and have been shown to have a greater percentage of bone-to-implant integration. However, there are also
some studies showing that HA is a very unstable implant material
under some conditions (inflammation, infections, micromotion)
and can prove detrimental to bone and tissues in the long term.
As one example, Gottlander and Albrektsson (1991) examined
the bone-to-implant contact area both at 6 weeks and 12 months
for HA-coated and CPTi implants. They concluded that the
bone-to-implant contact area at 6 weeks was 65% for HA and
59% for Ti. However, at 12 months, Ti exhibited a 75% contact
area versus 53% for HA. Some contend that the interactions of
HA with bone are biologically unstable because of this interface
exchange. As mentioned earlier, HA can also be subjected to dissolution, and higher crystallinity must be maintained to minimize this occurrence. Unfortunately, some amount of amorphous
biomaterial is often present during plasma-spray processing of
the coating, and this substance is susceptible to dissolution. The
long-term stability of HA-coated implants is still very controversial. Although the bond between HA and bone is considered to
be strong, the mechanical stability of the interface between the
coating and the metallic substrate may be unstable under some
conditions.
Some studies have shown that the survival rate of HA-coated
implants is initially higher than that for titanium plasmasprayed implants, but in one study, the survival rate significantly
decreased after 4 years. Failures were associated with inflammation of the surrounding tissues, with delamination and exfoliation of the implant. Some implants were retrieved before failure;
these revealed partial loss of the HA coating, with flattening
and thinning in some areas and an increase in local Cl and Mg
ions. The implications of these factors relative to clinical implant
failure remain unknown. Another concern is the adherence of
microorganisms to the HA surface. A study of failed titanium
plasma-sprayed and HA-coated implants revealed a colonization of coccoid and rod-shaped bacteria on HA implants, possibly as a result of the bioreactivity of HA. The roughened surface
of the HA implants can also contribute to plaque growth, periimplantitis, and dissolution once the coating is exposed. This can
decrease the chance of long-term survival.
Another study compared the torsional strength of CPTi,
Ti-6Al-4V, and HA-coated implants ankylosed in bone. The
torque of separating for a period of up to 4 months ranged from
74 N-cm for the uncoated implants to 186 N-cm (HA-coated
implants). These torsion-resistance values reflect the rotational
shear resistance of the implant. Thus HA-coated implant surfaces
in this circumstance provided greater implant–bone interface area,

CHAPTER 12

Quality 1

Quality 2

Quality 3

Quality 4

• Figure 12-14 Four qualities of bone.

higher shear tolerance, and higher torsional strengths in areas
where a sinus lift procedure had been conducted.

HA Coating and Bone Quality
As previously stated, the type of bone in which the implant will be
placed is of critical importance. Bone for implantation has been
classified into four types: type I consists of mostly homogeneous
compact bone, type II consists of a thick layer of compact bone
surrounding a core of dense trabecular bone, type III is a thin layer
of cortical bone surrounding a core of dense trabecular bone, and
type IV is composed of a thin layer of cortical bone with a core of
low-density trabecular bone (Figure 12-14). Type IV bone is by
far the most compromised bone environment for implant stability
because of its inadequate quality and quantity.
In spite of all its possible disadvantages, hydroxyapatite has
multiple indications for implant applications. Studies reporting on
the biological response to both the coated and uncoated implants
suggest that HA-coated implants were interfaced intimately with
bone and that the mineralized matrix extended into the microporosity of the HA coating. Numerous osteocytes were found along
the periphery of HA-coated implants, which indicates that these
implants are a better option for areas of poor bone quality, such as
the maxilla. In one study, Brånemark-type titanium implants were
evaluated in type IV bone, and a survival rate of 63% was found
for mandibular implants and 56% for maxillary implants. These
values are lower than the survival rates of 90% or more when these
implants were placed in type I and II bone.
Another study compared the survival rates of titanium screwtype implants and HA-coated cylinders in type IV bone. At 36
months, Ti implants had a survival rate of 78% compared with
98% for HA implants. At 48 months, this survival rate fell to
75% for the metal implants. In a follow-up study, titanium screws
exhibited a 91% 3-year survival rate and 89% for a 7-year period
in type IV maxillary bone. These rates can be compared with a
survival level of 95% for HA implants during a 7-year period. All
of these studies indicate that HA-coated implants have a greater
survival rate in type IV bone. Therefore many recommend the use
of HA-coated implants in areas of poor or less-than-ideal bone as
sites for implant placement. The bone height available for implant
placement is also a factor in considering which type of implant to
use. A 5-year study revealed a 70% failure rate in bone for titanium
screws with an implant length of 8 mm. HA-coated screws of the
same length had only a 4% failure rate over this period. There was
no significant difference in the failure rates between the two types
of implants when the length of the screws was increased to 12 mm.
Another indication for HA-coated implants was their use in
fresh extraction sites, owing to the initial stability afforded by

Dental Implants

267

these types of implants. Implant placement can sometimes be
performed immediately after an extraction. Initial stability has
been reported to be difficult to obtain in some of these cases, and
this could lead to implant loss. A comparison of the survival rate
of HA-coated implants, metallic implants, and hollow basket
implants was made after 7 years of immediate implant placement.
Survival rates of 95%, 90%, and 82% were found, respectively.
The implant–bone interface contact area was also shown to be
62% for HA-coated implants and 29% for metallic implants after
28 days of placement.
Further advances in the field of dental surgery have allowed
placement of implants in areas where bone was not normally present or had been lost. Maxillary and nasal sinus lifts are commonplace in partially dentate individuals who need an implant-based
reconstruction. Bone grafts have enabled the placement of a sinus
lift in posterior areas where bone is deficient. Unfortunately, the
quality of bone produced from these bone grafts is of lower quality,
and an implant needs a substantial implant–bone contact area for
function. Most of these implant sites oppose fully dentate arches,
which normally exert a higher amount of masticatory force. Thus
initial stability, enhanced bone integration, and higher strength
are important implant properties for these locations. Studies have
revealed that HA-coated implants exhibited a push shear bond
strength of 7 MPa versus 10 MPa for titanium metallic implants
after a period of 10 weeks. After 32 weeks, HA-coated implants
continued to have shear strengths five times greater than those of
metallic surface implants.
The controversy that the resorption of HA coating over time
could compromise long-term implant survival was examined
in a meta-analytic review by Lee et al. (2000) that reported the
outcomes of HA-coated implants in human clinical trials. This
review suggests that the survival rates are similar for both and
that the HA coating did not compromise the long-term survival
of these implants. Indications from reviews supporting the selection of HA-coated implants over titanium- or metal-surfaced
implants include (1) the need for greater bone–implant interface contact area, (2) the ability to place the implant in type IV
bone, (3) fresh extraction sites, and (4) newly grafted sites. It has
also been shown that the advantages of HA-coated implants are
mainly short term in nature and are related to the initial stability
of the implant, which most often determines its prerestorative
success or failure.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Several types of biocompatibility test data may be useful in selecting an
appropriate implant. What is the principal factor on the basis of which
an implant material should be selected as suitable or unsuitable for
osseointegration?

Biocompatibility of Implants
The concept of biomaterial biocompatibility does not refer to
total inertness but rather to the ability of a material to perform with an appropriate response in a specific application
(Chapter 17, Basic Concept of Biocompatibility). Biocompatibility is affected by the intrinsic nature of the material, in addition
to its design and construction. Therefore the state of biocompatibility may be specific to a particular situation or function. The
American Dental Association outlines some acceptance guidelines
for dental implants, including the following: (1) evaluation of

268

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

mechanical properties that ensure sufficient strength; (2) demonstration of ease of fabrication and sterilization potential without
material degradation; (3) safety and biocompatibility evaluation,
including cytotoxicity testing, and tissue interface characteristics;
(4) freedom from defects; and (5) at least two independent longitudinal prospective clinical studies demonstrating efficacy.
The primary surface interactions between an implant material and the host take place at the surface of the implant within
a region of approximately the size of one water molecule (about
0.275 nm). However, this does not mean that the implant–tissue interactions are isolated to this interface. Some studies have
reported high titanium levels in both the spleen and lungs of rabbits immediately after surgery, but these concentrations were well
within normal limits. In humans, Ti levels have been reported at
50 ppm, but they can reach levels of up to 200 ppm in tissues
surrounding some titanium implants. At this level, tissue discoloration may be visible, but the material is still well tolerated by
the body. Kasemo and Lausmaa (1991) demonstrated the dissolution of corrosion products into the bioliquid and adjacent tissues. Thus the outermost atomic layers of an implant are critical

regions associated with biochemical interactions of the implant–
tissue interface. These reports emphasize the importance of process controls and a high degree of standardization and surface
cleanliness in the production of implants. Most recently, there
has been a focus on titanium corrosion (Figure 12-15) as a possible cause of peri-implantitis. As the titanium corrodes as a result
of bacterial production of acidic toxins, the particles that lodge
in the peri-implant tissues are believed to elicit an inflammatory
response, which increases the progression of disease. To date,
there is no predictable treatment for peri-implantitis disease. The
recurrence rate after some form of therapy is usually 50%, and
the disease progression eventually leads to loss of the implant
and the prosthesis that the implant is supporting. Figure 12-16,
A shows biopsied tissue from a peri-implant site demonstrating
multiple titanium particles scattered throughout. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis was done to confirm this finding using x-ray diffraction analysis (Figure 12-16, B). Studies
have also shown the presence of yellow nail syndrome, which
results from systemic titanium leaching from titanium implants.
This syndrome can manifest with symptoms such as yellow nails

• Figure 12-15 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of implant corrosion demonstrating breakdown of the surface with retrieved failed implant on the left (A) and reference implant on the right (B). Note
increased roughened surfaces and increased corrosive landmarks on the failed implant. C, Corresponding
EDAX analysis of failed implant (left image) showing decreased Ti and increased Mg and Na, indicative of
corrosion. D, EDAX of reference implant (right image) for comparison.

A

B

• Figure 12-16 A, Biopsied sample along diseased peri-implant site demonstrating presence of particles
embedded in tissue (yellow arrows). B, Scanning electron miscroscopy (SEM) (×600) of biopsy sample
showing one particle approximatey 37 μm across (red circle) to be Ti by EDAX. (From Soler MD, Hsuv S-M,
Fares C, et al: Titanium corrosion in peri-implantitis, Materials (Basel). 2020;13(23):5488. doi:10.3390
/ma13235488.)

CHAPTER 12

and high titanium levels in the blood. Other manifestations
include chronic sinusitis, bronchiectasis, and pleural effusions.

Dental Implants

269

5
Fatigue and fracture

CRITICAL QUESTION

Biomechanics
The integration of bone with implants serves as the basis for the
biomechanical analyses performed for dental implants. Close
approximation of bone-integrated conditions with the surface
of an implant permits the transfer of forces and site-specific
stresses with elastic displacement of the bone and implant. The
stresses that are generated are highly affected by four main considerations: (1) masticatory factors (frequency, bite force, and
mandibular movements), (2) support for the prosthesis (implant
supported, implant–tissue supported, implant–tooth supported), (3) the mechanical properties of the materials involved
in the implant restoration (elastic modulus, yield strength, fracture strength, ductility, etc.), and (4) the design of the implant
body and the associated intraoral prostheses. One of the most
important variables affecting the close apposition of bone to
the implant surface is the relative movement, or micromotion.
Movement shortly after implantation prevents the formation of
bone and encourages the formation of fibrous connective tissue around the implant surface. This collagen-rich connective
tissue is known to be of lower modulus and strength. This is
the reason that a delay of months for intraoral restoration has
been recommended before loading after surgery. As mentioned
previously, success has been reported with immediate loading
of implants, depending on bone quality, patient selection, and
short-term control of intraoral function. The key issue is control of implant-to-tissue micromotion during the initial healing
of bone.
Numerous studies have defined the relationships for the
response of bone to the types of biomechanical stresses and
strains and their magnitudes. The results have been summarized
as the “frost paradigm,” where microstrain magnitudes are correlated with bone conditions of disuse atrophy (<500 με), normal function (500 to 1500 με), and microtrauma (more than
500 με). This concept is depicted schematically in Figure 12-17.
This paradigm affords opportunities to evaluate implant and
construct designs on a relative basis using finite-element models and analyses (FEM/FEA). Once again, this literature is well
developed.
Two main types of loading conditions can occur at an implant
site. These are represented by axial forces and bending moments
caused by noncentric loading conditions. A bending moment
can best be demonstrated by visualizing a cantilever beam design
in which the maximum bending moment is located at the fixed
base of support and is calculated as force (perpendicular to the
beam) times the length of the lever arm. These bending moments
become highly significant depending on the type and design of
implant restoration planned.
Rangert (1989), Skalak (1983), and Brunski (1988) analyzed
the theoretical effects of cantilever length, number of implants,
arrangement of implants, and prosthesis design. Their models were
based on the initial Brånemark hybrid prosthesis for the atrophic
mandible (Figure 12-18). This type of restoration usually involves

x 103)

4

Microstrain (

What are the important considerations for intraoral prosthesis design and
material?

3

Increased mass/altered geometry

2
Functional stability
1
Decreased mass/altered geometry
0
In vivo response of bone

• Figure 12-17 Schematic diagram of Frost paradigm.

four to six implants confined to the area between the mental foramen of the mandible, with cantilevers extending from the most
distal implant. These were restored with acrylic resin and denture
teeth, which were attached to a metallic superstructure by the
use of several types of attachment methods. The most significant
aspect of these studies is the optimal ratio of the cantilever length
to the interfixture distance.
When two or more implants are placed in a straight line,
the bending moment will be distributed proportionately to the
implants, provided that the intraoral prosthesis is designed to be
sufficiently rigid. Placement of the implants in an offset manner
has been suggested for more favorable positioning because it
redistributes the implant loading. However, some recent studies
have shown that tripodization of implants does not necessarily
minimize stresses as much as the use of wider-diameter implants
placed in a straight line. An increase in the anteroposterior
placement of implants is also recommended to minimize the
off-axis loading of the implant components. The load is greatest
at the most distal implant when an anteriorly positioned cantilever prosthesis exists. Thus the distance between the most terminal abutment and the one adjacent to it should be increased
to reduce the stress and strain induced within the most distal
abutment.
Another important factor to consider is the fit of the prosthesis
on the implant. An inaccurate fit will lead to a nonuniform distribution of load, with the unit closest to the load bearing most
of the forces. For well-integrated implants, the weakest link in the
early systems of Brånemark was the gold screw (also known as the
abutment screw), which is regarded as the safety feature for these
restorations. The external loads were transferred through the gold
screw if an inaccurate fit or overload existed, and the screw would
deform and fracture. These screws were fairly retrievable and were
easy to replace. The ultimate tensile strength of the gold screw was
designed to function within the normal ranges of occlusal force in
the molar region.
Some guidelines include computing the anteroposterior span
of all the implants and allowing a distance of 1.5 times any cantilever distance while limiting the maxilla to a maximal cantilever
of 8 mm because of the limitations of bone quality. Any cantilever length over 7 mm causes a significant increase in microstrain
within both the framework and bone. Therefore for any length

270

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

A

B

over 7 mm, ideal functional conditions should be considered,
or the decision to proceed under less ideal conditions should be
approached with extreme caution.
Another area of debate is the attachment of implants to natural teeth. The consensus seems to be that attaching implant
intraoral prostheses to natural teeth should be limited and that
having lone implants is a better restorative option. However,
in cases using natural teeth in the restoration (e.g., when a low
maxillary sinus position is present), there is disagreement as
to whether or not this decreases the survival probability of the
entire restoration. This issue stems from the different nature of
attachments to bone between the implant and the tooth. The
implant is integrated with bone (rigid), meaning that it has
a direct connection with bone. On the other hand, a tooth is
attached to bone through the periodontal ligament, which provides sensory functions to the tooth and also deforms in response
to masticatory loads. Numerous reports have focused on these
types of reconstructions; however, they should be approached
with caution. Bone formation or resorption is determined by the
tension or compression within the periodontal ligament. A concern associated with the attachment of an implant to a natural
tooth is that the mobility of the tooth might minimize its loadsharing ability and overload the implant, understimulate the
tooth, or cause a breakdown of the intraoral prosthesis. Several
devices, such as the IMZ intramobile element, have been developed to allow the implant to accommodate the movement of
the periodontal ligament. In any event, studies will continue to
elucidate the effects of implant and natural tooth attachment on
the probability of success. The results from most of the previous
studies suggest that the attachment of natural teeth to implants
does not compromise the prognosis of the prosthesis. Because
these studies also confirm the overall excellent success rates of
implant-supported prostheses, it is still recommended that this
be the first approach for treatment.

Summary

C
• Figure 12-18 A, The original Brånemark hybrid prosthesis designed
to accommodate severely atrophic mandibles. B, The hybrid prosthesis
usually uses four to six implants. C, Corresponding superstructure that is
screwed to the implants.

Selected Readings
Albrektsson T, Zarb G, Worthington P, et al: The long-term efficacy of
currently used dental implants: A review and proposed criteria of success, Int J Oral Max Impl 1:11–25, 1986.
Brånemark PI, Zarb GA, Albrektsson T: Tissue Integrated Prosthesis:
Osseointegration in Clinical Dentistry, Chicago, 1987, Quintessence.

The implant systems currently available are diverse. In 2020, there
were hundreds of companies manufacturing many different systems. The implant biomaterials, for the most part, range from
CPTi and titanium alloys to HA-coated devices. Manufacturers
have developed individualized designs for their implants, which
are now mostly root forms, and they are continually altering marketing strategies to highlight the features of each. Although most
of the implant materials described in this chapter are believed to
be biocompatible, the precise bone-bonding mechanisms are not
fully characterized on a molecular level. When the mechanisms
that ensure implant bioacceptance and structural stabilization are
more fully understood, implant failures will become less, provided
that implants are used properly and placed in sites for which they
are indicated.

Lee JJ, Rouhfar, Beirne OR: Survival of hydroxyapatite-coated
implants: A meta-analytic review, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 58:1372–
1379, 2000.
Meffert RM: Ceramic-coated implant systems, Adv Dent Res 13:170–
172, 1999.
Misch CM, Perel ML, Wang HL, et al: Implant success, survival and failure: The International Congress of Oral Implantologists (ICOI) Pisa
Consensus Conference, Implant Dent 17:5–15, 2008.

CHAPTER 12

Renvert S, Persson GR, Pirih FQ, et al: Peri-implant health, peri-implant
mucositis, and peri-implantitis: Case definitions and diagnostic considerations, J Clin Periodontol 45(S20):S278–S285, 2018.
Schnitman PA, Shulman LB (editors): Dental Implants: Benefits and
Risk, An NIH-Harvard Consensus Development Conference,
Washington, DC, 1979, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, pp 1–135.
Skalak R: Biomechanical considerations in osseointegrated prostheses,
J Prosthet Dent 49:843–849, 1983.

Dental Implants

271

The Academy of Prosthodontics: Glossary of Prosthodontic Terms:
9th ed, J Prosthet Dent 117(5S):e1–e105, 2017.
von SteyernVutl P, Kokubo Y, Nilner K: Use of abutment-teeth vs. dental implants to support all-ceramic fixed partial dentures: An in-vitro
study on fracture strength, Swed Dent J 29:53–60, 2005.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Akagi K, Okamoto Y, Matsuura T, et al: Properties of test metal ceramic
titanium alloys, J Prosthet Dent 68:462–467, 1992.
Akca K, Iplikcioglu H: Finite element stress analysis of the influence of
staggered versus straight placement of dental implants, Int J Oral Max
Impl 16:722–730, 2001.
Albrektsson T, Brånemark PI, Hansson HA, et al: Osseointegrated titanium implants. Requirements for ensuring a long-lasting, direct boneto-implant anchorage in man, Acta Orthop Scand 52:155–170, 1981.
Albrektsson T, Sennerby L: State of the art in oral implants, J Clin Periodontol 18:474–481, 1991.
Albrektsson T, Zarb G, Worthington P, et al: The long-term efficacy of
currently used dental implants: A review and proposed criteria of
success, Int J Oral Max Impl 1:11–25, 1986.
ASTM F 67-00: Standard specification for unalloyed titanium, for surgical implant applications (UNS R 50250, UNS R 50400, UNS R
50550, UNS R 50700). In Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Philadelphia, 2000, American Society for Testing and Materials.
ASTM F 136-98: Wrought titanium–6 aluminum–4 vanadium ELI
(extra low interstitial) alloy (UNS R 56401) for surgical implant
applications. In Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Philadelphia,
2000, American Society for Testing Materials.
ASTM F 139-00: Standard specification for wrought 18 chromium–14
nickel–2.5 molybdenum stainless steel bar and wire for surgical
implants (UNS S 31673). In Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Philadelphia, 2000, American Society for Testing Materials.
Ataya A, Kline KP, Cope J, et al: Titanium exposure and yellow nail syndrome, Respir Med Case Rep 16:146–147, 2015.
Balkin B: Implant Dentistry: Historical overview with current perspective, J Dent Educ 52:683–695, 1988.
Baltag I, Watanabe K, Kusakari H, et al: Long-term changes of hydroxyapatite-coated dental implants, J Biomed Mater Res 53:76–85, 2000.
Berglund F, Carlmark B: Titanium, sinusitis, and the yellow nail syndrome, Biol Trace Elem Res 143:1–7, 2011.
Berman N: Implant technique for full lower denture, Wash Dent J 19:15–
17, 1950.
Bosker H, van Dijk L: The transmandibular implant, Ned Tijdschr Tandheelkd 90:381–389, 1983.
Bosker H, van Dijk L: The transmandibular implant: a 12-year-follow-up
study, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 47:442–450, 1989.
Brånemark PI, Zarb GA, Albrektsson T: Tissue Integrated Prosthesis:
Osseointegration in Clinical Dentistry, Chicago, 1987, Quintessence.
Brunski JB: Biomechanics of oral implants: Future research directions,
J Dent Educ 52:775–787, 1988.
Brunski JB, Skalak R: Biomechanical considerations in advanced osseointegration surgery: Applications in the maxillofacial region. In
Worthington P, Brånemark PI (editors): Biomechanical Considerations
in Advanced Osseointegration Surgery: Applications in the Maxillofacial
Region, Carol Stream, IL, 1992, Quintessence, pp 15–40.
Chang YL, Lew D, Park JB, et al: Biomechanical and morphometric
analysis of hydroxyapatite-coated implants with varying crystallinity,
J Oral Maxillofac Surg 57:1096–1109, 1999.
Chuang SK, Wei LJ, Douglass CW, et al: Risk factors for dental implant
failure: A strategy for the analysis of clustered failure-time observations, J Dent Res 81:572–577, 2002.
Cochran D, Fritz M: Implant therapy I and II, Annals of Perio 1:707–
821, 1996.
Craig RG, editor: Restorative Dental Materials, ed 11, St. Louis, 2001,
Mosby.
Davies JE: Mechanisms of endosseous integration, Int J Prosthodont
11:391–401, 1998.
Driskell TD: History of implants, Calif Dent Assoc J 15:16–25, 1987.
Fiorellini JP, Chen PK, Nevins M, et al: A retrospective study of dental
implants in diabetic patients, Int J Periodont Rest 20:366–373, 2000.
Gottlander M, Albrektsson T: Histomorphometric studies of hydroxylapatite-coated and uncoated CP titanium threaded implants in bone, Int
J Oral Max Impl 6:399–404, 1991.

Grandi T, Garuti G, Guazzi P, et al: Survival and success rates of immediately and early loaded implants: 12-month results from a multicentric
randomized clinical study, J Oral Implantol 38:239–249, 2012.
Greenfield EJ: Implantation of artificial crown and bridge abutments,
Dent Cosmos 55:364–369, 1913.
Ichikawa T, Hanawa T, Ukai H, et al: Three-dimensional bone response
to commercially pure titanium, hydroxyapatite, and calcium-ionmissing titanium in rabbits, Int J Oral Max Impl 15:231–238, 2000.
Kasemo B, Lausmaa J: The biomaterial-tissue interface and its analogues in
surface science and technology editor. In Davis JE (editor): The BoneBiomaterials Interface, Toronto, 1991, University of Toronto, pp 19–32.
Lacefield WR: Materials characteristics for uncoated/ceramic-coated
implant materials, Adv Dent Res 13:21–26, 1999.
Lautenschlager EP, Monaghan P: Titanium and titanium alloys as dental
materials, Int Dent J 43:245–253, 1993.
Lee JJ, Rouhfar, Beirne OR: Survival of hydroxyapatite-coated
implants: A meta-analytic review, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 58:1372–
1379, 2000.
Lindh T, Back T, Nystromm E, et al: Implant versus tooth-implant supported prosthesis in the posterior maxilla: A 2-year report, Clin Oral
Implants Res 12:441–449, 2001.
Linkow LI: The bladevent – a new dimension in endosseous implants,
Dent Concepts 11:3–18, 1968.
McCracken M: Dental implant material: Commercially pure titanium
and titanium alloys, J Prosthodont 8:40–43, 1999.
Meffert RM: Ceramic-coated implant systems, Adv Dent Res 13:170–
172, 1999.
Misch CM, Ismail YH: Finite element stress analysis of tooth-to-implant
fixed partial denture designs, J Prosthodont 2:83–92, 1993.
Misch CM, Perel ML, Wang HL, et al: Implant success, survival
and failure: The International Congress of Oral Implantologists
(ICOI) Pisa Consensus Conference, Implant Dent 17:5–15, 2008.
Natiella JR, Armitage JE, Greene Jr GW, et al: Current evaluations of
dental implants, J Am Dent Assoc 84:1358, 1972.
Ogiso M, Yamashita Y, Matsumoto T: Differences in microstructural
characteristics of dense HA and HA coating, J Biomed Mater Res
41:296–303, 1998.
Parr GR, Gardner LK, Toth RW: Titanium: The mystery metal of implant
dentistry. Dental materials aspect, J Prosthet Dent 54:410–414, 1985.
Rangert B, Gunne J, Sullivan DY: Mechanical aspects of a Brånemark
implant connected to a natural tooth: An in vitro study, Int J Oral
Max Impl 6:177–186, 1991.
Rangert B, Jemt T, Jörneus L: Forces and moments on Branemark
implants, Int J Oral Max Impl 4:241–247, 1989.
Renvert S, Persson GR, Pirih FQ, et al: Peri-implant health, peri-implant
mucositis, and peri-implantitis: Case definitions and diagnostic considerations, J Clin Periodontol 45(S20):S278–S285, 2018.
Renvert S, Polyzois IN: Clinical approaches to treat peri-implant mucositis and peri-implantitis, Periodontol 2000 68:369–404, 2015.
Roberts HD, Roberts RA: The ramus endosseous implant, Oral Implantol
1:104–116, 1970.
Rodriguez AM, Aquilino SA, Lund PS, et al: Evaluation of strain at the
terminal abutment site of a fixed mandibular implant prosthesis during cantilever loading, J Prosthodont 2:93–102, 1993.
Schnitman PA: Implant dentistry: Where are we now? J Am Dent Assoc
124:39–47, 1993.
Schnitman PA, Shulman LB. Dental Implants: Benefits and Risk, An NIHHarvard Consensus Development Conference, Washington, DC, 1979,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, pp 1–135.
Schnitman PA, Wohrle PS, Rubenstein JE: Immediate fixed interim prostheses supported by two-stage threaded implants: methodology and
results, J Oral Implantol 16:96–105, 1990.
Skalak R: Biomechanical considerations in osseointegrated prostheses, J Prosthet Dent 49:843–849, 1983.
Small IA, Chalmers J: Lyons Memorial Lecture: Metal implants and the
mandibular staple bone plate, J Oral Surg 33:571–585, 1975.
Smith D: Dental implants: Materials and design considerations, Int J
Prosthodont 6:106–117, 1993.
272.e1

Sohn BS, Heo SJ, Koak JY, et al: Strain of implants depending on occlusion types in mandibular implant-supported fixed prostheses, J Adv
Prosthodont 3:1–9, 2011.
Steflik DE, Corpe RS, Young TR, et al: The biologic tissue responses to
uncoated and coated implanted biomaterials, Adv Dent Res 13:27–33,
1999.
The Academy of Prosthodontics: Glossary of prosthodontic terms,
9th ed. J Prosthet Dent 117(5S):e1–e105, 2017.
Tonetti MS: Determination of the success and failure of root-form osseointegrated dental implants, Adv Dent Res 13:173–180, 1999.

272.e2

Venable CS, Stuck WG, Beach A: Effects on bone of the presence of metals: based on electrolysis, Ann Surg 105:917–938, 1937.
von SteyernVutl P, Kokubo Y, Nilner K: Use of abutment-teeth vs.
dental implants to support all-ceramic fixed partial dentures:
an in-vitro study on fracture strength, Swed Dent J 29:53–60,
2005.
Wang B, Ruan W, Liu J, et al: Microstructure, mechanical properties and
preliminary biocompatibility evaluation of binary Ti-Zr alloys for
dental application, J Biomater Appl 33:766–775, 2019.

Part IV

Fabrication of Prostheses
13 Auxiliary Materials, 275
14 Casting Investments and Casting Procedures, 306
15 Digital Technology in Dentistry, 326
16 Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and
Polishing, 332

273

