4

Mechanical Properties of Solids
OUTLINE
What Are Mechanical Properties?

Properties of Surface Interactions

Stress-Strain Properties

Strength of Tooth Structure

Other Strength Test Methods

Selection of Dental Materials

Fracture of Restorations

KEY TERMS
Brittle Relative inability of a material to deform plastically before
it fractures.
Deformation Change in dimension caused by force application. If
the deformation recovers when the force is removed, it is called
elastic deformation. If deformation does not recover completely
when the force is removed, the amount of deformation that
does not recover is called permanent or plastic deformation.
Ductility The amount of plastic deformation a material can sustain
under tension before fracture. This property is reported quantitatively as percent elongation.
Elastic limit Magnitude of elastic stress above which plastic deformation occurs.
Elastic modulus (also modulus of elasticity and Young’s modulus) Resistance to elastic deformation of a material by force that
is calculated as the ratio of elastic stress to elastic strain.
Fracture toughness The critical stress-intensity factor at the
point of rapid crack propagation in a solid containing a crack of
known shape and size.
Hardness Resistance of the surface of a material to plastic deformation, which is typically produced by forcing a pointed or
spherical indenter on the surface.
Malleability Ability to be hammered or compressed plastically
into thin sheets without fracture.
Pressure Force per unit area acting on the surface of a material.
This is different from stress, which refers to the distribution of
force within the material.
Proportional limit Magnitude of elastic stress below which stress
remains proportional to strain on a stress-strain curve.
Resilience The amount of elastic energy per unit volume that
is sustained on loading and released on unloading of a test
specimen.

Strain Change in dimension per unit initial dimension. In mechanical testing, the change in length is used. There are elastic strain
and plastic strain.
Strain hardening (work hardening) Increase in strength and
hardness and decrease in ductility of a metal that result from
plastic deformation.
Strength (1) Stress at the point the material fractures; depending
on method of loading, there are tensile, compressive, shear, torsional, flexural, and impact strengths. (2) Maximum stress that a
structure can withstand without sustaining a specific amount of
plastic strain; this is known as yield strength or proof stress.
Stress Force per unit area within a structure subjected to a force;
depending on the direction of force relative to the object, there
are tensile, compressive, and shear stresses.
Stress concentration Area or point of significantly higher stress
that occurs because of a structural discontinuity such as a crack
or pore or a marked change in dimension.
Stress intensity (stress intensity factor) Relative increase in
stress at the tip of a crack of given shape and size when the
crack surfaces are displaced in the opening mode (also known
as fracture toughness).
Toughness Ability of a material to absorb elastic energy and
deform plastically before fracturing; measured as the total area
under a plot of tensile stress versus strain.
Tribology The study and application of the principles of friction,
wear, and lubrication.
True stress Ratio of applied force to the actual (true) cross-sectional area; however, for convenience, stress is often calculated
as the ratio of applied force to the initial cross-sectional area.
Yield strength The stress at which a test specimen exhibits a
specific amount of plastic strain.

We learned in Chapter 1, Indirect Restorative Materials, that
partially edentulous patients may receive removable partial
dentures (RPDs) when the construction of a fixed bridge is
not the best treatment option. You will learn later that RPDs
are retained and supported by abutment teeth, to which they
are attached by clasps, which are often made of alloys as the

frameworks (Figure 1-12). Figure 4-1 illustrates the stages of
seating a clasp to an abutment tooth. The dotted patches represent the cross sections of the clasp as it is being seated. The
greatest convexity or bulge, farthest from the axis of the tooth,
is called the height of contour of the tooth. The area that is
recessed relative to the height of the contour of the tooth or

64

CHAPTER 4

recessed relative to any part of the tooth surface is known as the
undercut. The clasp that engages an undercut area on the abutment tooth for the purpose of retention is known as a retentive
clasp. The clasp opposite the retentive clasp, which engages the
surface area occlusal to the height of contour of the tooth, is
known as the reciprocal clasp. Greater than 180° encirclement
of the abutment tooth allows for stabilization of the RPD.
During the insertion of the device, the patient positions the clasps
above their respective abutment teeth (position A in Figure 4-1)
and forces the device to seat completely, which requires the clasp
to traverse. This design means that the retentive clasp arm must
flex open to slide past the height of contour of the tooth (position B in Figure 4-1), and then flexes back to engage the undercut
area (position C in Figure 4-1). Meanwhile, the reciprocal clasp will
properly engage the tooth above the height of contour (position C
in Figure 4-1).
After wearing the device over some period of time, the patient
begins to notice that the RPD is no longer retentive and moves up
and down during chewing. The dentist will recognize that most
likely, the retentive clasp has lost adaptation to the tooth surface
because of deformation, resulting from repeated insertion and
removal followed by chewing on the device. For metallic clasps, the
dentist will use a pair of pliers to adjust the clasp to the original position by bending. The process can be repeated whenever the device
becomes loose again, but there is a limit to the number of times the
clasp can be bent. Eventually, the clasp breaks during adjustment.
This sequence of events illustrates how a material responds to
applied force through changes of configuration. First, the clasp
flexes slightly to slide over the height of contour and returns to the
initial dimension to engage the undercut. A material is an elastic
solid, or is said to behave elastically, when it exhibits the ability
to deform (change in configuration) under an applied force and
regain the original shape and size when the force is removed. When
the clasps become loose because of permanent deformation after a
Reciprical
arm

Clasp

A
Retentive
arm

B
C

A

Height of
contour
Height of
contour
Undercut
Undercut

B

Mechanical Properties of Solids

65

period of service, they are adjusted to restore their original configuration. Plasticity is the ability of solids to change shape permanently
when subjected to forces without rupture, whereas the quantity
of permanent deformation the clasp can sustain before rupture is
known as ductility. This sequence can also be demonstrated by
flexing an orthodontic wire (elastic deformation), bending the wire
further to make a 90° angle (plastic deformation), and bending
back and forth several times at the same bend until the wire breaks.
The focus of this chapter is to describe the mechanical characteristics of these materials and discuss the basic principles behind
these mechanical properties.

What Are Mechanical Properties?
We can perform the same exercises on a series of solid materials
of any size and shape and label them as stiff or flexible, hard or
soft, brittle or ductile, and fragile or tough, based on the materials’
responses. A brittle material is one that fractures without exhibiting
plastic deformation. These descriptions are known as mechanical
properties because they characterize a material’s resistance to elastic deformation, plastic deformation, or fracture under an applied
force. However, these are qualitative terms that do not indicate
how similar or dissimilar materials of the same type may be. To
enable clinicians to select appropriate materials, their mechanical
properties must be defined and quantified. For this purpose, the
direction of force being applied, along with the magnitude of the
force and the area of contact with the material, must be known.
We also need to define the parameters measuring the deformation exhibited by the material and the resistance of the material to
plastic deformation or fracture under a force. The parameters used
for these purposes are stress, strain, and strength.

Stress
Force, as defined in Chapter 1, What Is Force, is the interaction of
one object with another during actions of push or pull, and the
quantity of force is measured using the unit of newton (N). Take
the bending clasp as an example; our hand is one object bending
the clasp (second object) to induce plastic deformation (adjustment) of the clasp. We can treat that action like we apply a force
on an object. Newton’s third law of motion states that when an
external force acts on a solid, a reaction occurs to oppose this force,
which is equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to the external force. That reaction force from the material is the resistance we
feel during the interaction.
In Figure 4-2, A, a block of material weighing 20 kg is hung
to the ceiling by a wire with a cross-sectional area of 7 mm2. The

C

P1

P

P

P‘

P
• Figure 4-1 Stages of removable partial denture (RPD) clasp seating.
Dotted patches represent the cross sections of the clasp arms. The area
recessed relative to the height of the contour is known as the undercut.
A, Before seating. B, The retentive clasp passing the height of contour.
C, Seating completed.

A

P

B

P2

C

• Figure 4-2 Illustration of simple stresses. A, Tensile stress. B, Compressive stress. C, Shear stress. When the load in shear test is not applied
along the wall (hollow arrow), the test is no longer a pure shear stress but
becomes a bending test.

66

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

weight stretches the wire slightly, which generates internal forces
between atoms. The gravitational force exerted on the wire with
a mass of 1 kg is about 9.8 N. We can reasonably assume that the
distribution of the internal forces over the cross section of the wire
is uniform. The stress (σ), by definition, is the exerted force per
unit area perpendicular to the force direction:
20 × 9.8 N
σ=

= 28 × 106 Pa = 28 MPa .

from the post, except that the compressive stress generated within
the supporting material is dispersed beyond the area of contact,
laterally and vertically. The stress is higher under the area of contact
and decreases with distance from the area of contact. This pattern
is known as stress distribution or stress gradient. When a patient bites
a bolus of food between an upper and a lower tooth, both teeth are
exposed to compressive load and undergo compressive stress.

Tensile Stress
Figure 4-2, A shows the mode of tension along the long axis of a
wire where a pair of forces is pulling away along the wire axially.
The two forces are the weight of the block and the reaction force
from the ceiling. The stress generated in the wire is tensile stress
and should be the same throughout the entire wire if the crosssectional area is uniform. You can roll up a sheet of rubber dam
and generate tensile stress within the roll by pulling at both ends.

Shear Stress
When a bar is fixed at one end of a panel (Figure 4-2, C) and downward force perpendicular to the long axis of the bar is applied along
the surface of the panel, there is an upward reaction force from the
panel, which acts on the bottom of the bar. Note that the direction
of the reaction force is opposite to that of the applied force but
not along the same path. This is a characteristic of shear force. The
shear stress of the section of the bar that is experiencing the shear
force is divided by the cross section of the area. In orthodontic
treatment, the wire delivers forces to brackets; the horizontal component of the force relative to the bonded enamel surface will generate shear stress within the bracket and within the resin bonding
cement. Debonding may occur by shear-stress failure of the bonding cement. Debonding of the brackets can also be achieved by
twisting the bracket with orthodontic pliers. This mode of action
is called torsion, where the plier functions as a lever. This action is
the torque that debonds the bracket. Note that the force applied
through the pliers is to rotate the bracket, and the length of the
pliers enhances the tendency to twist the bracket. Therefore, the
tendency is not measured by force but moment, which is the force
multiplied by the length of the pliers. Moment and torque are like
forces that can cause the objects to move; the difference is that they
can be amplified with the help of a longer lever.
If the downward force applied on the bar is away from the
panel, the stress developed within the bar is no longer purely shear
stress but also includes additional tensile and compressive stresses
as the bar bends. More on this phenomenon is discussed in the
section on flexure tests.

Compressive Stress
When the post is resting on a surface, there is a reaction force from
the surface pushing upward (Figure 4-2, B), which illustrates the
mode of compression along the long axis of the post. The stress
generated within the post is known as compressive stress. The contact
area of the supporting surface is also under compressive loading

Combined Stresses
For complex objects, such as three-unit fixed dental prostheses
(FDPs; Figure 4-3, A) and two-unit cantilever FDPs (Figure 4-3, B),
the stresses generated in these devices are different from those in
the simple objects shown in Figure 4-2. As the patient chews, the
masticatory load causes the pontic to bend toward the tissue even

7 × 10−6 m 2

(1)
The International System (SI) unit of stress is N/m2 and is known
as a pascal (Pa). Because the unit of Pa, as defined, is very small,
MPa for megapascal (= 106 pascals) is customarily used. In the
present example, the stress in the wire is 28 MPa in tensile mode.
The weight of the wire is insignificant relative to the force applied
and is usually ignored in the calculation.
When the same block is placed on a supporting post with a
cross-sectional area of 140 mm2 (Figure 4-2, B), calculation shows
that the stress within the post is 1.4 MPa in compression mode.
The force applied at the top of the post divided by the contact area
has the same value as the stress, but this value is known as pressure
(p) because this is the force or load that is exerted on the outer
surface and not within the supporting post.
The stresses developed according to the nature of the applied
forces and the object’s shape are tensile, compressive, and shear
stresses (Figure 4-2).

P

P
Compression

Tension
Compression

Tension

A

B
• Figure 4-3 Types of stresses acting on a fixed dental prosthesis (FDP). A, Stresses induced in a threeunit bridge by a flexural force (P). B, Stresses induced in a two-unit cantilever bridge. Note that the tensile
stress develops on the gingival side of the three-unit bridge and on the occlusal side of the cantilever
bridge.

CHAPTER 4

though the change is not visually detectable. In the three-unit
FDP, the bending causes the pontic to become concave (contract
slightly) and the tissue side to become convex (stretch slightly).
Therefore there is compressive stress on the occlusal side and tensile stress on the tissue side. Both stresses concentrate at the connector because of the smaller cross-sectional area than that of the
pontic. In the case of cantilevered FDPs, the unsupported end will
bend the most, leaving the occlusal surface convex and the tissue
side concave. Therefore there is tensile stress on the occlusal side
and compressive stress on the tissue side. Both stresses will also
concentrate at the connector area. Note that there is a moment
acting on the abutment tooth in the occlusal-gingival direction
that could result in failure of the cement and loosening of the prosthesis. A longer span of the FDP will place more burden on the
cementing medium.
Dental restorations and devices in the oral cavity may be
subjected to tension, compression, shear, torsion, or bending.
The types of stresses developed within the restoration or devices
would likely be a combination of tensile, compressive, and shear
stresses.

Strain
Materials respond to forces through changing shape or dimension.
Deformation resulting from tensile or compressive forces is one
dimension that can be measured directly. The ratio of the change in
length, ΔL, divided by the original length, L0, is the strain (ε) of that
material under a given load. If the wire in Figure 4-2, A is 100 mm
long before loading and increases by 0.5 mm (ΔL = 0.5 mm) when
loaded, the strain is as follows:
0.5 mm
  L 
 0.005  0.5%.
L 0 100 mm
(2)
We can conclude that the wire reaches a stress of 28 MPa
with a tensile strain of 0.5%. When the load is removed, and the
length of wire recovers to 100 mm, the wire exhibits all elastic
strain under the weight. If the wire does not recover completely
when the load is removed and registers a length of 100.2 mm
(ΔL = 0.2 mm), the strain value will be 0.2%, which is the plastic
strain the weight caused. The difference between the two values is
0.3%, which is the maximum elastic strain of the wire. Maximum
elastic strain is also called flexibility and is discussed in detail later
in the chapter.
When we add more weight to the wire until the breaking
point, and the total length of the two broken wires is 101.3 mm
(ΔL = 1.3 mm), this means that the wire sustained 1.3% of plastic
deformation at fracture. Keep in mind that when the wire breaks,
the elastic strain vanishes because there is no stress in either piece
of the wire. The value obtained is also called elongation or ductility. The clinical relevance of this property is discussed later in the
chapter. Note that strain is a dimensionless quantity; units such
as meter per meter or centimeter per centimeter are often used to
remind one of the system of units employed in the actual measurement. The accepted equivalent in the English system is inch per
inch, foot per foot, and so forth.
By now you should realize that whenever there is a stress
applied on a material, the material should exhibit a corresponding
strain. The relationship between stress and strain during the elastic
deformation is the elastic property of the material and is discussed
in detail in the next segment.

Mechanical Properties of Solids

67

Strength
The stress and strain of a material under load was defined earlier.
The challenging nature of the oral cavity, to which dental materials
are subjected, was presented in Chapter 1 (Challenges of Dental Materials in the Oral Cavity). How can it be known if dental
materials can survive in this harsh environment? Clinicians must
use a material and decide on the dimensions of the restoration or
prosthesis in such way that the material will safely withstand various occlusal-loading conditions. For specific dental materials, we
are equally interested in the maximum stress that a structure can
sustain before this material becomes plastically deformed and subsequently fractures. For this purpose, having information regarding the elastic properties and strength characteristics of materials
under various stress conditions, which were discussed earlier, is
imperative. Strength is the stress necessary to cause either a specified amount of plastic deformation (i.e., yield strength) or fracture
(i.e., breaking strength) of the material. The term elastic properties
refers to the stress-strain relationship during elastic deformation.
Hooke’s law of elasticity, also known as Hooke’s law, states that the
stretching of a solid body (e.g., metal, wood) is proportional to
the force applied to this structure when the material behaves elastically. There is, however, a limit for each material, and this linear
relationship is known as the proportional limit. These strength
properties will be discussed in detail, along with their clinical significance, later in the chapter.
Information on the elastic properties and strength of materials can be obtained only through experimental investigations that
use well-defined, well-configured, and standardized specimens,
and subject these to comparatively simple stress conditions. Testing machines are designed to induce certain typical deformations
of test specimens, such as tension, compression, shear, torsion,
and bending (flexure). They also record the forces applied and the
deformation the test specimens can sustain until fracture occurs.
The maximum load recorded before the fracture of the specimen
and the original dimension of the specimen are used to calculate
tensile strength, compressive strength, shear strength, torsional
strength, and flexural strength. For each dental material where
strength values are needed as part of the specification, there are
testing protocols established by TC 106−Dentistry of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). Following these
protocols is important for the standardization of testing methods.
Figure 4-4 shows a material represented by six rows of atoms
under different states of shear stress. The zigzag line indicates the
plane where the movement between rows of atoms would occur
and is called the slip plane. The atoms on either side of the slip
plane are shaded differently for contrast. Figure 4-4, A shows the
relative locations of labeled atoms without stress. When a pair of
forces from opposite directions acts on the top and bottom rows
of the material, thereby subjecting the material to shear forces
(Figure 4-4, B), the positions of the atoms shift in response to
the shear stress generated within the material. Note the change in
position between atoms a and b; atoms 1, 2, and 3; and atoms 4,
5, and 6. The overall change is the elastic shear strain, which will
return to zero when the shear force is removed (Figure 4-4, A). If the
shear force is increased sufficiently to move the atoms in row “a” farther to a new stable position, and then removed, a permanent slip
(plastic deformation) along the slip plane occurs (Figure 4-4, D).
If the pair of forces is applied to the row of atoms directly above
and below the slip plane (Figure 4-2, C), the relative position shift
of atoms a and b will appear similar to the displacement seen in
Figure 4-4, B, but the relative positions of atoms farther above the

68

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

1
2
d

b

2

Slip
plane

3

a

4

1

Shear stress

Shear
force
a

3

b

4

6

A

Shear
force

5

5

6

B

Elastic shear strain
1
Shear
force
d

1

2

Shear stress
a

3

b

4

2
Shear
force

3

a
4

b
5

5
6

C
Elastic shear strain

Plastic
shear
strain

6

D

• Figure 4-4 Atomic model illustrating deformation by shear force. A, No stress. B, Elastic deformation
of the model under shear forces applied along the top and the bottom of the model. C, Elastic deformation
by shear forces along the opposite side of the slip plane; note the difference in the quantity of the elastic
strain by the movement of the atoms relative to that shown in (B). D, Plastic deformation as the atoms have
moved to new positions and the forces are relieved.
slip plane, such as 1, 2, and 3, and atoms farther below the slip
plane, such as 4, 5, and 6, will remain the same (Figure 4-4, C). As
the shear force is increased and then removed when the row of atoms
moves to the next stable position, the arrangement of atoms will
register the same permanent deformation (Figure 4-4, D). Recall
the discussion of moment of force. When the force is applied at a
distance from the interface (Figure 4-4, B), the moment increases;
therefore less force is needed to induce the same plastic deformation. This is the reason most shear tests for bonding systems do not
truly measure shear bond strength.

Stress-Strain Properties
Figure 4-5 shows a stress-strain graph for a stainless-steel orthodontic wire that has been subjected to a tensile force. The solid
orange line shows the stress (σ) obtained from forces divided by
the cross-sectional area as the strain (ε) increases from stretching.
The shape of the curve is typical for a tensile test. As the test begins,
the stress-strain curve moves linearly toward the upper right, then
starts to deviate from a straight line after passing the proportional
limit (PL). The upward or y-axis movement is further reduced as
the graph moves past the yield strength (YS). As the movement
continues farther to the right, the line reaches a plateau at the
ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and eventually breaks at a lower
stress at the breaking strength (BS).
Imagine that we are in control of the tensile testing machine
and observe the stress-strain plot recording in real time on the
screen. Let us stop the experiment before the stress reaches PL and
unload the wire; we will observe that the curve traces back to the
zero stress and strain as the wire completes the elastic recovery to
the original length. The linear segment of the curve is the graphical illustration of Hooke’s law of elasticity. We can restart the test,
and then stop immediately after the stress-strain curve has passed
the proportional limit and unload. We still observe complete elastic recovery of the wire, which indicates that Hooke’s law does not
apply beyond the proportional limit, but the material deformation at that stress level remains elastic only. This process can be
repeated with increasing stress levels and soon reach a point where

2000
1800
UTS

UTS = 1625 MPa

BS

1600
1400

BS = 1570 MPa

YS

YS = 1536 MPa

0.2% Offset

1200
1000

PL = 1018 MPa

PL

Past BS
After UTS

800

E = 192 GPa

PL to UTS
Up to PL

600
400
200
0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

• Figure 4-5 Stress-strain plot for a stainless-steel orthodontic wire that has
been subjected to tension. The proportional limit (PL) is 1020 MPa. Although
not shown, the elastic limit is slightly higher than that value. The yield strength
(YS) at a 0.2% strain offset from the origin (O) is 1536 MPa, and the ultimate
tensile strength (UTS) is 1625 MPa. The breaking strength (BS) is 1570 MPa.
An elastic modulus (E) value of 192 GPa is calculated from the slope of the
elastic region (= PL/ε). Note the shape change of the wire as the tensile test
progresses: the width of the wire contracts, necking after UTS and fracture.
the wire still exhibits elastic recovery but does not revert back to
the original length, thereby exhibiting plastic deformation. Meanwhile, the rate of stress increase with respect to the strain reduces
substantially. Normally, we describe that the stress has exceeded
the elastic limit of the material, which is the stress level when

Stress

CHAPTER 4

Yield point

Mechanical Properties of Solids

69

removed. At this point, the wire has been stressed beyond the
material’s elastic limit, which is the greatest stress to which the
material can be subjected to where the material will return to
the original dimensions when the force is released. The value of
the elastic limit, when available, is used as the yield point of the
material. As discussed earlier, a stress-strain curve, such as that
shown in Figure 4-5, does not show the stress of the elastic limit.
However, for certain materials, experiments have shown that the
stress values of the elastic limit are very close to their respective
proportional limits. For those materials, the use of the values of
the proportional limit as the yield point is customary.

Strain

• Figure 4-6 Yield point of a linear polymer. Note the downturn of the

CRITICAL QUESTION

curve, indicating substantial necking after the material past the yield point.

Yield strength is a commonly reported property for metals and alloys but not
for ceramics. Why is it not possible to measure the yield strength of ceramics
or other purely brittle materials? Use a stress-strain plot to explain your
answer.

plastic deformation occurs. Unfortunately, there is no notable feature on the curve that enables us to identify the stress level of
the elastic limit. To find a convenient and practical substitute, we
commonly draw a line parallel to the straight portion of the curve,
starting at a value of 0.2%, along the strain axis and extend it until
this line intersects with the curve. This stress value is designated
the 0.2% offset yield strength or proof stress. The significance of yield
strength will be discussed later. From this point on, more plastic
deformation of the wire develops after each stretch and unload.
The stress then reaches a maximum value at the ultimate tensile
strength, and the wire begins to show signs of necking, which is a
reduction of the diameter in one area of the wire (specimen illustration in Figure 4-5). As stretching continues, the level of stress
decreases until the wire fractures at the breaking strength, with
all the plastic deformation that occurred after the ultimate tensile
strength concentrating around the area of necking.

Proportional Limit, Elastic Limit, and Yield
Strength (Proof Stress)
When a wire is stretched steadily in tension, the wire eventually
fractures. However, in dentistry, we are also interested in the stress
at which plastic deformation begins to develop, which is called
the yield point. Softer metals and thermoplastic polymers show a
pronounced yield point (Figure 4-6). This occurs at slightly higher
stress levels than the elastic limit. At the yield point, the material shows a sudden increase of strain with no increase in stress.
Materials specific for dental applications do not usually exhibit
this behavior (Figure 4-5); thus a different approach is needed to
determine the yield point.
For a material that satisfies Hooke’s law, the elastic stress must
be directly proportional to the elastic strain. Graphically, the initial region of the stress-strain plot must be a straight line, as shown
in Figure 4-5. In fact, a small portion of the elastic deformation
appears to be nonlinear before the onset of plastic deformation,
which is demonstrated by the curve deviation from the straight
line. The point of deviation is called the proportional limit, which
represents the maximum stress above which stress is no longer proportional to strain.
When a small tensile stress is induced in a wire, the wire will
return to the original length when the load is removed. If the load
is increased progressively in small increments, and then released
after each increase in stress, a stress value will be reached at which
the wire does not return to the original length after the load is

For materials such as stainless steel, a good portion of the elastic deformation appears nonlinear, so the use of the proportional
limit as the yield point is inappropriate. In addition, irregularities along the straight-line region of the stress-versus-strain plot
may represent minor deviations from Hooke’s law and cause some
uncertainty in determining the appropriate point at which the
selected line deviates from linearity (proportional limit). Thus a
different property, yield strength, is used in cases where the proportional limit cannot be determined with sufficient accuracy.
Yield strength is a property that represents the stress value at
which a small amount of plastic strain has occurred. A value of
either 0.1% or 0.2% of the plastic strain is often selected and is
referred to as the percent offset. As in Figure 4-5, the yield strength
for 0.2% offset is illustrated. If yield-strength values for two
materials tested under the same conditions are to be compared,
identical offset values should be used. For brittle materials such
as dental ceramics, the stress-strain plot is a straight line with no
appreciable plastic region. Thus a determination of yield strength
is not practical at either a 0.1% or 0.2% strain offset because there
is no plastic strain.
Proportional limit, elastic limit, and yield strength (proof stress)
are defined differently for the respective phenomena that occur
during mechanical testing. However, they have been used interchangeably when referring to the yield point. Their values are
usually very close but can be different in some cases. The elastic
limit is the true yield point when this value is available. The proportional limit is used as the yield point when the proportional
limit is well defined on the stress-strain curve and known to be
close to the elastic limit. The yield strength is easy to obtain from
a stress-strain curve with a preset amount of plastic deformation.
Remember that the yield strength is defined with some plastic
deformation in mind, but the proportional and elastic limits
cover elastic deformation only. As shown in Figure 4-5, the yield
strength (proof stress) is greater than the proportional limit. These
values are important in the selection of dental materials because
they represent the stress at which permanent deformation of the
structure begins. If stresses generated during chewing exceed these
values, the restoration or appliance may become distorted and no
longer function as originally designed.
Imagine a patient biting on a bolus of food, as shown in
Figure 4-3, exerting enough load to generate tensile stresses at the
area noted as tension of the bridge alloy. As the patient gradually applies the load, the tensile stress in these areas will increase

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

proportionally to the magnitude of the load applied. If the stress
generated is below the elastic limit and up to the proportional
limit, the removal of the load will always result in an elastic recovery of the bridge from the slight bending that occurs. If the patient
at any time exerts a load that creates stresses in the tension area
that are equal to or exceed the elastic limit of the material used,
the bridge will be permanently deformed, and then break. Accordingly, one must choose materials with adequately high elastic limits
for the construction of a dental bridge. If the size of the connector
is too small, greater tensile stress is generated. A properly designed
restoration is also important.

Elastic Modulus (Young’s Modulus or Modulus
of Elasticity)
Hooke’s law states that stress and strain change proportionally
within the region of elastic deformation. Mathematically, there is
a constant between the stress and the strain. We call this constant
the elastic modulus, modulus of elasticity, or Young’s modulus,
designated by the letter E. The elastic modulus (E) of the orthodontic wire used in Figure 4-5 can be calculated as follows using
the proportional limit (1018 MPa) and the elastic strain (0.0053)
of this material:
1018 MPa
E  Stress   
 192, 075 MPa  192 GPa .
Strain 
0.0053
(3)
Because the elastic modulus represents the ratio of the elastic stress
to the elastic strain, we can reason that the lower the strain recorded
for a given stress, the greater the value of the modulus. For example, if
wire A is much more difficult to bend than wire B of the same shape
and size, considerably higher stress must be induced before a desired
elastic deformation can be produced. As such, wire A is considered
to have a comparatively higher modulus of elasticity than wire B.
Thus wire A, with a higher modulus of elasticity, stretches less than
wire B under the same stress. Elastomeric impression materials have
a greater stiffness (elastic modulus) than alginate-based impression
materials. Thus a greater force is needed to remove an elastomeric
impression tray from undercut areas in the mouth. The modulus of
elasticity of most dental biomaterials is given in units of either MPa
or GPa (gigapascals; 1 GPa = 1000 MPa).
In general usage, the term elasticity also implies “being easily
stretched or expanded,” which contradicts what we just learned:
that a material with a high elastic modulus requires more force to
deform. In fact, elasticity in solid mechanics describes the ability of
a strained body to recover this body’s original size and shape after
deformation. This statement does not imply if straining the material
is easy or difficult based on the stress applied. Therefore the elastic
modulus is a parameter that quantifies the elastic behavior. We can
also state that the elastic modulus describes the relationship between
stress and strain within the elastic region. Some would state that
the elastic modulus is the slope of the initial straight portion of the
stress-strain curve. The steeper the line, the higher the elastic modulus and the stiffer the material. As such, the elastic modulus has been
considered a measurement of the stiffness or rigidity of a material.
Recall Figure 2-2, A, in which bond force is defined as the
attraction between two atoms, and Figure 4-4, B, which shows the
distance between atoms under the influence of shear stress, such as
the distance between atoms 2 and 3 and between atoms 4 and 5.
The zero resultant force at equilibrium represents the material that

300
CS = 262 MPa
250
Compressive stress (MPa)

70

CS = 234 MPa
PL = 235 MPa

200
PL = 176 MPa

Enamel

150

Dentin
100
Edentin = 11.7 GPa
Eenamel = 33.6 GPa

50

0
0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

Strain (%)

• Figure 4-7 Stress-strain plot for enamel and dentin that have been
subjected to compression. The ultimate compressive strength (CS), proportional limit (PL), and elastic modulus (E) values are shown. (Data from
Stanford JW, et al: Compressive properties of hard tooth tissue. J Am Dent
Assoc 60:746–756, 1960.)

is not under stress. The change in distance between atoms increases
with respect to the external force applied and should follow the
curve of resultant force in Figure 2-2. The slope of resultant force
drawn from the equilibrium position will have the same meaning
as the slope of the stress-strain curve. Because the force needed to
change the distance between atoms depends on the bond strength
between atoms, the value of the elastic modulus reflects the atomic
bond strength of the material, which remains constant and independent of mechanical treatment, such as the stress applied, and
the plastic deformation incurred during the test.
Figure 4-7 shows a stress-strain graph for enamel and dentin
that have been subjected to compressive stress. These curves were
constructed from the typical values of elastic moduli, proportional
limit, and ultimate compressive strength reported in the scientific
literature. Variations in the values of the proportional limit, elastic
modulus, and ultimate compressive strength have been reported
for enamel and dentin relative to the area of the tooth from which
the test specimens were obtained. Note that the proportional limit,
ultimate compressive strength, and elastic modulus of enamel are
greater than the corresponding values for dentin (Figure 4-7). The
elastic modulus of enamel is about three times that of dentin in this
study. Dentin can sustain more plastic deformation than enamel
under compressive loading before dentin fractures. Thus enamel
is a stiffer and more brittle material than dentin, and unsupported
enamel is more susceptible to fracture. Conversely, dentin is more
flexible and tougher. Although there is no quantifiable measurement for the brittleness of a material, we often describe materials as
being more brittle or less brittle. We refer to more brittle materials
as having less elastic deformation before fracture and less brittle
materials as having more elastic deformation before fracture.
Recall Figure 3-2, which shows a Newtonian fluid exhibiting
a linear relationship between the shear stress and strain rate of the
fluid, and the slope of the curve is defined as the viscosity of the
liquid. Figure 4-5 shows that there is a linear relationship between
the tensile stress and strain of a solid, and the slope defines the

CHAPTER 4

elastic modulus of a solid. Both terms are derived from the stress
and strain relationship; they represent two different properties.
The elastic modulus is the quantity that dictates how much the
material will deform elastically for a given stress and remain at
that state forever unless the stress is removed, at which time, the
material returns to its initial shape. The viscosity is the analogous
quantity that shows how fast the material will flow and the change
of strain in proportion to the duration that the stress is applied.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can the ultimate tensile stress (ultimate strength) sometimes be less
than the maximum tensile stress?

Ultimate Strength and True Strength
Ultimate strength for tensile, compressive, and shear tests is calculated by dividing the maximum force recorded before fracture
by the original cross-sectional area of the material. The specimen
configuration shown in Figure 4-5 demonstrates that the cross
section of the wire decreases as the wire lengthens under tensile
stress. Because of the reduction in area, the force required to
increase deformation decreases. Thus the stress calculated past the
ultimate tensile strength decreases, leading to a breaking strength
that is lower than the ultimate tensile strength. Figure 4-8 shows a
stress-strain plot of a metal rod that has been subjected to a tensile
test. The stress is calculated using the original cross-sectional area
(orange line) and the actual cross-sectional area (green line). The
stress value, calculated as the force divided by the actual crosssectional area at each measured strain value, is known as true
stress. The green line shows that the ultimate tensile strength and

UTSb (BS)

Tensile stress, σ

UTSa
BS
PL

Toughness

Resilience

Flexibility

Ductility

Strain, ε

• Figure 4-8 Conventional tensile stress-strain curve (orange line) in the
plastic deformation region calculated using the initial cross-sectional area
of a rod. The green line (above the orange line) represents the calculated
stress values based on the actual reduced area of the rod as deformation increases. Note that the ultimate tensile strength (UTS) value of the green line
is the same as the breaking strength (BS). The resilience can be calculated
by measuring the area within the elastic region. Mathematically, the area is
half of the proportional limit (PL) multiplied by the elastic strain (equation [4]).
The toughness is the total area within the elastic and plastic regions.

Mechanical Properties of Solids

71

breaking strength are the same. The original dimension is always
used to calculate the various strength values reported—and for
good reason. The failure of a restoration or device means that
either yielding or rupture has occurred, whichever came first.
Damage has occurred at a lower load, and therefore a higher and
more precise value of true ultimate strength is not meaningful.
Figure 4-8 demonstrates that after a metal rod has been stressed
beyond this material’s yield point, the stress needs to increase to
continue exerting plastic deformation until fracture of the specimen occurs. One may think that the material has a fixed yield point;
once the stress applied has overcome that barrier, the same level of
stress should be enough to induce further plastic deformation until
the specimen fractures. The true stress of Figure 4-8 shows that the
material that has been plastically deformed is resisting further yielding
because more stress is required. Indeed, the material becomes stronger
with respect to resisting further plastic deformation, as it is plastically
deformed until it fractures, and this phenomenon is known as strain
hardening, work hardening, or cold working. We will learn the mechanism of material strengthening by plastic deformation in Chapter 9,
Dislocation Movement in Polycrystalline Alloys.

Flexibility and Ductility
From the stress-strain curve, we know that for each stress value,
there is a corresponding strain value. Having a material with sufficient strength to resist plastic deformation or fracture is not the
only consideration for selection. However, there are instances
where elastic and plastic deformation are critical. For example,
in an orthodontic appliance, a spring is often extended a considerable distance under the influence of a small stress. In such a
case, the structure is said to be flexible and possesses the property
of flexibility. Flexibility is defined as the elastic strain shown on
a stress-strain curve (Figure 4-8) or the reversible flexural strain
of a bending test. Ductility represents the amount of permanent
deformation a material can sustain under a tensile load up to
the point of fracture, which is the deformation from the proportional limit to the breaking strength in Figure 4-8. Malleability
is the amount of permanent deformation a material can sustain
without rupture under compression, such as hammering or rolling a metal rod into a thin sheet. Gold is the most ductile and
malleable pure metal, followed by silver. Of the metals of interest
in dentistry, platinum ranks third in ductility, and copper ranks
third in malleability.
Ductility can be determined in one of three ways: (1) the percent
elongation after fracture as seen in Figure 4-8, (2) the reduction in
area of tensile test specimens, and (3) the maximum number of
bends performed in a cold-bend test before the wire fractures. The
first method involves taking the information directly from a stressstrain curve. The second method involves necking at the fractured
end of a ductile metal wire after rupture under a tensile load. The
percent decrease in cross-sectional area of the fractured end in comparison with the original area of the wire or rod is referred to as the
relative reduction in area. The third method is known as the coldbend test. We can bend several orthodontic wires back and forth
individually until they all break. The wire that takes the greatest
number of bends to break is the most ductile wire.
Burnishing of a cast metal margin to reduce the width of a gap
between the crown margin and the tooth surface is a good example of flexibility and ductility at work. Figure 4-9 shows a burnishing procedure of an open metal margin (Figure 4-9, A), where
a smooth, dull instrument is used as a burnishing tool to press
the metal margin against the tooth (Figure 4-9, B) and close the

72

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

A
B
C
• Figure 4-9 Schematic illustration of a procedure to close an open margin of a metal crown by burnishing with a dull instrument shaped like a rotary instrument. A, The margin of the crown is open. B, The
instrument pulls down the margin and press toward the tooth to “close” the margin. C, Note that after the
instrument is removed, the elastic strain of the crown rebounds; a slight marginal discrepancy remains. To
reduce the size of discrepancy, one needs to pull down the metal farther toward the gingival to compensate for the elastic recovery.

marginal gap. This movement is possible as a result of the elastic
plus plastic strain of the metal. After the instrument is removed,
the margin springs back an amount equal to the total elastic strain
(Figure 4-9, C). Because at least 25 μm of space must be provided
for the cement between the tooth and the crown, total burnishing
on the tooth or die is usually adequate because the amount of elastic strain recovery is relatively small. Pushing the margin further
while pressing against the tooth to compensate for the anticipated
elastic recovery may be required. Naturally, the metal should have
relatively high ductility to prevent fracture of the margin during
burnishing and moderate yield strength to facilitate the procedure.

Resilience and Toughness
Work is the product of the force times the amount of deformation (distance) through which the force acts. When work is performed on a body, energy is imparted to this body. Consequently,
when a dental restoration is deformed, the restoration absorbs
energy. If the induced stress is less than the proportional limit
(i.e., the oral structure is not permanently deformed), only elastic
energy is stored in the structure until the applied force is removed.
Resilience (Ur) is the ability of a material to absorb energy when
it is deformed elastically (Figure 4-8). The modulus of resilience is
the amount of strain energy that can be absorbed per unit volume
without permanent distortion and can be determined by the area
of the elastic region:
2
U r  1   1   .
2
2 E

(4)
When the induced stress goes beyond the elastic limit of the
material, additional work is needed to cause plastic deformation.
The ability of a material to absorb energy and plastically deform
without fracture is called toughness. The modulus of toughness
is the amount of strain energy per unit volume that a material can
absorb just before it fractures and can be calculated as the area
under the stress-strain curve up to the fracture point.
Toughness increases with an increase in strength and ductility. The greater the strength and the higher the ductility (total
plastic strain) are, the greater the toughness is. Thus we can conclude that a tough material is generally strong, although a strong

material is not necessarily tough. The term brittleness is generally
considered to be the opposite of toughness. It is important to note
that in popular terms, resilience is associated with springiness,
which implies bouncing back from a deformation. In the present context, resilience precisely means the amount of strain energy
absorbed within a unit volume of a structure being stressed to its
proportional limit.

Poisson’s Ratio
Because of the conservation of mass, an object, such as a cylinder, becomes longer and thinner when a tensile force is applied
to it. Conversely, a compressive force acts to make such an object
shorter and wider. An axial tensile stress, σz, along the z-axis (long
axis) of a mutually perpendicular x,y,z-coordinate system produces
an elastic tensile strain (εz) and an accompanying elastic contraction in the x- and y-directions (εx and εy, respectively). The ratio
of εx/εz or εy/εz is an engineering property of the material called
Poisson’s ratio ( ν), calculated as follows:
y

 x  .
z
z
(5)
Poisson’s ratio can be similarly determined in an experiment
involving an axial compressive stress. For an ideal isotropic material of constant volume, the ratio is 0.5. Most engineering materials have values between 0.25 and 0.30.

Other Strength Test Methods
There exists a large number of standardized tests to determine the
various mechanical properties of materials. Three types of tests relevant to dental materials are discussed.

Diametral Tensile Strength
Tensile strength can be determined by subjecting a rod, wire, or
dumbbell-shaped specimen to tensile loading. A lack of plastic
deformation for adaptation to the gripping device of a conventional tensile test apparatus and alignment makes tensile tests for
brittle materials difficult. However, when a short cylinder (disk)

CHAPTER 4

is laid on the side with a load applied from the top along the
diameter of the cylinder, the load generates tensile stress perpendicular to the vertical plane passing through the center of the disk
(Figure 4-10), forcing the cylinder to expand laterally. This test
is referred to as the diametral compression test, and the strength
value obtained is the diametral tensile strength. In this method,
the compressive load is applied by a flat plate against the side of a
short cylindrical specimen (disk). Fracture should occur along this
vertical plane (the dashed vertical line on the disk). The diametral
tensile strength value is calculated by the following formula:
Diametral tensile strength = 2F ,
πDt
(6)
where F is the applied load, D is the diameter of the disk, and t is
the thickness of the disk.
This test is simple to conduct and provides excellent reproducibility. However, the use of this test on materials that exhibit
appreciable plastic deformation before fracture results in erroneously high tensile-strength values. In addition, fracture of the
specimen into several pieces rather than the ideal fragmentation
into two segments suggests an unreliable test result.

F

Mechanical Properties of Solids

73

Flexural Strength
Flexural strength measures the response of a material to bending
and does not measure the fundamental material properties, which
are tensile, compression, and shear strengths. During bending,
all three fundamental stresses are present. The flexural test is a
strength test of a bar supported at each end (Figure 4-11) or a
thin disk supported along a lower support circle under a static
load (Figure 4-12). The tensile stress usually develops along the
lower surface, which is the supported side of the test specimen,
and causes fracture. For the bar specimen, the failure stress value
is referred to as the uniaxial flexural strength, flexural strength,
transverse strength, or modulus of rupture. For the disk specimen,
the failure stress value is referred to as the biaxial flexural strength.

Uniaxial Flexural Strength
When the load is applied, the flat bar specimen bends with tensile, compressive, and shear stresses generated simultaneously. The
resulting strain is represented by a decrease in the length of the top
surface (compressive strain) of the specimen and an increase in the
length of the lower surface (tensile strain). Consequently, the principal stresses on the upper surface are compressive, whereas those on
the lower surface are tensile. Obviously, the stresses change direction within the specimen between the top and bottom surfaces,
with both stress and strain being zero at the transition. This neutral
surface does not change in dimension and is known as the neutral
axis. Shear stress is also produced near the supported ends of the
specimen but does not play a significant role in the fracture process.
There are two different mode-of-flexure tests: three-point
(Figure 4-11, A) and four-point (Figure 4-11, B). For rectangular
cross-section bars, the following equations may be used to calculate the flexural strength:
Three-point flexural σ =

Fracture
plane

3FL ,
2 wt 2

(7)
t

Four-point flexural σ =

Tension

3FL ,
4 wt 2

(8)

F

• Figure 4-10 Diametral compression test. Although a compressive force
is applied along the side of the disk, a tensile fracture is produced. The
tensile strength is calculated from the fracture load, F, the disk diameter, D,
and the disk thickness, t.

where σ = flexural strength (MPa) at the midpoint of the span,
P = the load (N) at fracture,
L = the distance between two support rollers (mm),
w = the width of specimen (mm), and
t = the thickness or height of specimen (mm).
One of the limitations of the three-point flexural test is that if
the bar specimen does not fracture at the midpoint directly under
the applied force (F), the moment of force at the point of fracture
should be used to calculate the fracture stress at the actual point
of fracture. The four-point flexural test shown in Figure 4-11, B

P
P/2

P/2

L/2

A

L

L/4

L/4

B

L

• Figure 4-11 Uniaxial flexure test designs. A, Three-point test. B, Four-point test.

74

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

P

• Figure 4-12 Schematic illustration of the piston-on-three-ball test for

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
How can two identical forces produce two different stresses in an all-ceramic
crown? Is it possible for a stiff material with a high modulus of elasticity to
fail with no plastic deformation and at a lower strength than a more flexible
material? Explain your answers.

the biaxial flexure test.

is preferred over the three-point test because the analyses of force
balance indicate that there is no shear stress present, and the
moment of force is constant within the central loading span where
fracture is expected.
Flexural tests are preferred to the diametral compressive test
when brittle materials are used in the construction of dental
prostheses, such as cantilevered bridges, multiple-unit FDPs (or
bridges), and complete dentures because the stress distributions
in flexural tests more closely simulate those that occur in these
prostheses.

Biaxial Flexural Strength
The edge of rectangular specimens often chips or fractures during preparation and can become an area of stress concentration influencing the strength values. The biaxial flexure test is
based on the piston-on-three-ball design that directs the strain
toward the center of the disk, away from the edge of the specimen (Figure 4-12). This test is preferred by some scientists to
avoid the problem of edge effects. For the typical biaxial flexural
tests, disk-shaped specimens 12 mm in diameter and 1.2 mm in
thickness are used. The load is applied by means of a piston with a
slightly curved contact surface, and the disk is supported by steel
balls, which have a diameter of approximately 3.2 mm. These are
arranged at an angle of 120° relative to each other on a circle
of approximately 10 to 12 mm in diameter. The biaxial flexural
strength is calculated from a complex equation that is beyond the
scope of this book.

Impact Strength
The term impact describes the reaction of a stationary object to a
collision with a moving object. A Charpy-type impact tester is
usually used to measure impact strength. A pendulum is released
that swings down to fracture a bar specimen with a V-notch in
the center and supported at both ends. The energy lost by the
pendulum during the fracture of the specimen can be determined by a comparison between the length the pendulum swings
after impact with the pendulum’s free swing when no impact
occurs. The energy lost divided by the area of the fracture surface
is the impact strength, with a unit of kJ/m2. Unlike the case in
most mechanical tests, the dimensions, shape, and design of the
specimen to be tested should be identical for uniform results.
This property may be defined as the energy required to fracture
a material under an impact force. An Izod-type impact tester is
like that of a Charpy, except the V-notch specimen is clamped
vertically at one end, and the blow is delivered at a certain
distance above the clamped end instead of at the center of the
specimen.
During impact, the external forces and resulting stresses
change rapidly; therefore a stress-strain curve cannot be used to
predict the impact strength precisely, but it is a good indicator. For
example, a material with a low elastic modulus and a high tensile
strength is more resistant to impact forces, whereas a high elastic
modulus and a low tensile strength suggest low-impact resistance.

Fracture of Restorations
In one of his books, Leonardo da Vinci described an experiment
where tensile strengths were measured for various lengths of iron
wires. His finding was that longer wires were weaker than shorter
wires. This result is inconsistent with the classical theory of what is
now known. Unexpected fractures of dental prostheses and restorations occur occasionally even when high-quality materials have
been used. From the point of view of fracture mechanics, both
observations are related to the presence of small microstructural
flaws and defects on the surface or within the internal structure
that facilitate the generation of locally high stresses in areas near
holes, grooves, notches, sharp corners, cracks, and other changes
in the dimension of the structure even though the average stress
within the structure is low. This increase in the peak-stress section
is called the stress concentration or stress riser. During da Vinci’s
time, the technology of making iron wire was likely to produce
inherent surface flaws that increased in number with longer wires.
This in turn increased the probability of fracture of longer wires
with a lower load.

Stress Concentration
Figure 4-13 shows an illustration of the theoretical tensile-stress distribution in brittle and ductile materials in the presence of a crack.
The localized stress (σLO) at the tip of the crack is proportional to
the square root of the ratio of the crack length (L) to the radius of
the crack tip (ρ); the relationship is shown as σLO ∝ L / ρ . The
crack tip in a brittle material is sharp (small radius) and does not
deform plastically to relieve stress. Therefore the crack is prone
to propagate as the localized stress increases to a critical level.
Note the increased level of tensile stress at the tip of the flaw
(Figure 4-13, A). However, the stresses at areas far away from these
flaws are much lower. Although the tensile stress has increased at
the flaw tip in brittle and ductile materials, stress has increased
by a smaller amount in the ductile material (Figure 4-13, B), in
which plastic deformation has occurred with subsequent widening of the flaw tip (increasing radius of the tip), thereby reducing
the magnitude of localized tensile stress. The flaw does not play
a significant role when the material is subjected to an external
compressive force (Figure 4-13, C) because the compressive stress
that develops in the material tends to distribute uniformly and
close the crack.
Surface defects, such as porosity, grinding roughness, and
machining damage, are common with brittle materials (e.g.,
ceramics, amalgams, and composites). These defects can be eliminated or reduced in depth by polishing. There are also interior
flaws, such as voids or inclusions. Unfortunately, little can be
done for interior flaws other than to ensure the highest quality of the structure during the fabrication stage. The design of
any prosthesis involves marked changes in contour, such as the
point of attachment of a clasp arm to a partial denture framework or a sharp internal angle at the pulpal-axial line angle of a
tooth preparation for an amalgam or composite restoration. The
transition areas often become sites of stress concentration. Any

CHAPTER 4

Brittle
material

Ductile
material

Crack
tip

l
Tensile
stress

Mechanical Properties of Solids

75

Brittle or ductile
material

Crack
tip

Flaw

Flaw

Flaw
Tensile
stress

Compressive
stress

A
C Compressive force
B Tensile force
Tensile force
• Figure 4-13 Effect of surface flaw on the stress distribution of materials under tension and compression. A, Surface flaw on brittle material substantially increases the tensile stress at the tip of the
flaw as a result of stress concentration. B, Plastic deformation at the tip of the surface flaw on the
surface of ductile material reduces the intensity of stress concentration at the tip of the flaw. C, Surface flaws have no influence on the compressive strength as the tip of the flaw is pressed closed by
compression.

change in contour should vary gradually rather than abruptly.
Therefore notches should be avoided. The internal line angles of
tooth preparations should be rounded to minimize the risk of
cusp fracture.
Recall the discussion on the challenges of restorations in the
oral cavity in Chapter 1, thermal expansion in Chapter 3, and
elastic modulus earlier in this chapter. When a direct restoration is bonded to the tooth or a prosthesis is cemented to tooth
structure, there is a difference in the elastic moduli and thermal
expansion coefficients across the bonded interphase. As the interphase is being occluded or subjected to temperature change from
food intake, the dimensions of all materials, including the tooth,
change accordingly but are different in quantity. The differences
in the quantity of changes can result in additional stresses in
the interphase and initiate fracture of the weaker structure. It is
not likely that all restorative materials used have elastic moduli
and thermal expansion coefficients that closely match that of
the tooth. Therefore the weaker, more brittle material should
have the lower elastic modulus so that more stress is transferred
to the material with the higher elastic modulus. The weaker,
more brittle material should have a slightly lower expansion or
contraction coefficient so that a protective compressive stress is
sustained in the structure of this material next to the interface
(Chapter 10, Maximize Development of Residual Compressive
Stresses).
Unusually high stresses may occur when a load is applied over
a small area of contact, also known as point contact or Hertzian
load. This phenomenon typically arises on a microscopic scale
when a force is transmitted through two bodies in contact. A clinical example is that of a cusp tip of an opposing crown or tooth
that encounters another restoration. The cusp tip should be well
rounded so that the occlusal contact areas on the brittle material are
large and wide, leading to reduced stress. In addition, the internal
line angle of the tooth preparation should have as large of a radius
of curvature as possible to reduce Hertzian stress in the intaglio of
the restoration.
In the following segment, we discuss some parameters that
have been devised to characterize the role of flaws in the propagation of cracks within the materials.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Fracture toughness is a more precise measure of the fracture resistance of a brittle
material than the tensile strength. Why is the tensile strength of brittle materials
—such as dental amalgam, composite, ceramic, and inorganic cements—so
variable? Which one of a series of reported tensile strength values should be used
in considering the selection of a new product made of one of these materials?

Fracture Toughness
For brittle materials, such as dental ceramics, strength is of limited
value in the design of ceramic prostheses. Small defects (porosity
and microcracks) are randomly distributed in location and size
throughout a ceramic, causing large strength variations in otherwise-identical ceramic specimens. Alan Griffith in 1920 proposed
that the failure of brittle materials occurs at the largest flaw of the
material. He invoked the thermodynamics energy conservation
law to formulate a fracture theory. Recall from the discussion of
resilience (Figure 4-8) that when an object is stressed elastically,
there is strain energy stored within the object (Figure 4-14, A).
The presence of flaws in a stressed body reduces the volume of
the solid under stress and thus the strain energy that would have
been stored in the shaded area around the notch in Figure 4-14, B.
Meanwhile, the total surface energy of the object increases, reflecting the increase in the surface area of the object resulting from the
presence of the notch.
The Griffith theory postulates that when the strain-energy
reduction from the presence of the notch is less than the total
surface energy of the notch surface, nothing happens at the tip of
the notch. However, this balance of energy changes as the external
stress increases. The quantity of the strain-energy reduction that
would have been stored in the shaded area increases, whereas the
surface energy of the notch surface remains the same because there
is no change to the size of the notch. When the projected strainenergy reduction in the shaded area exceeds the surface energy of
the notch surface, a crack will propagate from the tip of the notch
and continue until the object fractures. Griffith further developed
a relationship between the stress at failure and the flaw size (the
notch) based on balancing the reduction of strain energy that

76

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

σ

σ

Mode I:
Tension opening

Mode II:
In-plane shear
c

Mode III:
Out-off-plane shear
or tearing

A

σ

B

σ

C

• Figure 4-14 Energy-balance approach of Griffith criterion of fracture and modes of fracture.
A, An illustration of uniform stress distribution within an object under tensile force. The overall energy
of the stressed object is the total of the surface energy of the object and the strain energy stored in
2
the object (= 21  E  V0 , where Vo is the volume of the object). B, The effect of a notch with the depth
of “c” on the stress distribution of the same specimen under the same tensile force. The shaded
area represents the volume (V) of the object that does not store strain energy. The overall energy of
the stressed object decreases by the amount of strain energy that would have been stored in the
2
shaded volume (= 21  E  V ). However, the object gains surface energy from the surface of the notch
( = 2γc c t). γc is the surface energy, c is the depth of the notch, and t is the thickness of the object.
C, Three modes of stressing condition to enable propagation of preexisting cracks. Arrows show the
direction of forces.

occurs during fracture with the increase in surface energy resulting from the creation of new free surfaces when a crack grows. The
analysis gave the following result:
f 

2c E
,
c
(9)

where σf is the failure stress, c is the flaw size, γc is the surface
energy, and E is the elastic modulus. Because γc and E are intrinsic material properties, the value of 2γ c E should be a constant
for the material of the same composition being tested, and the
equation can be rearranged as 2 c E  f c . The relationship
embodies that scatter in the measurement of fracture stress (σ f)
arises from the variation in the size of flaw (c). The term f c is
known as stress intensity factor (Kc) or fracture toughness, and
K c  f c is the expression that describes the severity of the
stress state at the crack tip.
The scenario just discussed leads to the conclusion that during
fracture, new surfaces are created to release the elastic strain energy
stored during stressing. Under static-loading conditions, the work
required to extend the crack by the unit length is equal to the
dissipated elastic-strain energy. Therefore for brittle materials, the
term 2γc is also called the critical strain-energy release rate (Gc, for
Griffith), and Gc  2  c  K c2 / E; the factor 2 is needed because a
pair of equal-size free surfaces has evolved for every crack.
There are three ways of applying a force to enable a crack to
propagate experimentally, as shown in Figure 4-14, C: mode I is
commonly called the opening-mode loading, mode II corresponds
to shearing of the crack face that occurs with in-plane shear
stresses, and mode III is a tearing action driven by out-of-plane
shear stresses. The fracture toughness of a material determined
under tension using a standard configuration with a known flaw

size is given by the symbol KIc (the subscript I refers to mode I
fracture) in units of MPa.m1/2. The Griffith relationship is often
expressed as follows for a mode I fracture:
K Ic  f Y c crit ,
(10)
where ccrit is the critical flaw size that initiates propagation when
the stress reaches σf. Note that Y is a geometrical factor that comprises π shown in equation (9). The use of Kc in the literature
means that the experimental specimens used are not of standard
configuration with a known flaw size.
Fracture toughness (critical-stress intensity) is a mechanical
property that describes the resistance of brittle materials to the
catastrophic propagation of flaws under an applied stress. Thus the
fracture resistance of a porcelain veneer with a KIc value of
0.75 MPa.m1/2 is much lower than that of the tougher supporting
core ceramics used for ceramic-ceramic prostheses, such as alumina, with a KIc value of 3.4 MPa.m1/2, and yttrium-stabilized
zirconia, with a KIc value of 7.9 MPa.m1/2. Keep in mind that the
toughness of the material discussed earlier is about the energy
needed to fracture the material and comprises both elastic deformation and plastic deformation if fracture occurs.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Is a stiff material (high elastic modulus) stronger than a more flexible
material? Explain your answer by sketching a stress-strain plot.

Fatigue Strength
Strength values obtained from measurement of the failure loads
described in earlier tests are based on one loading cycle to failure.
Clinically, these strength tests can be misleading because these

CHAPTER 4

Stress
(σ), MPaS
Stress
amplitude,

restorations are subjected to repeated or cyclic loading and need
to be designed to withstand these recurring forces. Normal mastication induces several thousands of stress cycles per day within a
dental restoration without showing visible signs that would lead to
fracture. After a period of service, failure can occur without warning during normal mastication. Most prosthesis and restoration
fractures develop progressively over many stress cycles after the
initiation of a crack from a critical flaw that subsequently propagates until a sudden, unexpected fracture occurs. Stresses well
below the ultimate tensile strength of the material can produce
premature fracture of a dental prosthesis because microscopic
flaws grow slowly over many cycles of stress. This phenomenon
is called fatigue failure. The stress required to produce failures in
a specified number of cycles is called fatigue strength or endurance
strength. For glasses and certain glass-containing ceramics, the
induced tensile stress and the presence of an aqueous environment
further reduce the number of cycles to cause fatigue failure.
Fatigue behavior can be represented by an S−N diagram
(Figure 4-15), which is determined by subjecting a series of specimens to a constant cyclic-stress amplitude (S), which is the amount
that the stress deviates from the mean cyclic stress, and the number
of loading cycles (N) until the specimen fails. Millions of cycles
might be required to cause failure at lower loading levels, so the
abscissa is plotted logarithmically. In some materials, the S−N
curve flattens out eventually so that below a certain endurance
limit (σe), failure does not occur no matter how long the loads are
cycled (curve A of Figure 4-15). Thus, when the applied stress from
mastication is below the endurance limit of the material, the restoration is said to be free from fatigue failure. For other materials that
do not exhibit well-defined endurance limits, such as curve B of
Figure 4-15, we can specify a desirable life cycle NF, which is set at
5 × 107 cycles in Figure 4-15, and identify the corresponding stress
amplitude. The value of this stress amplitude is the fatigue strength.
For brittle materials with rough surfaces, the endurance limit is
lower than would be expected if the surfaces were highly polished.

Endurance limit

A

σe

NF
104

105

106

107

108

77

Some ceramic materials exhibit a phenomenon referred to
as static fatigue or delayed failure. These materials will support
high static loads for a long period of time, and then fail abruptly
under the same load. This failure is believed to result from a
stress-dependent chemical reaction between water vapor and the
ceramic surface, which alters the shape and/or depth of surface
flaws. The flaw size lengthens over time, the magnitude of tensile
stress that can be sustained by the ceramic is reduced, and eventually, the ceramic fails under the same load.

Weibull Modulus
The strength of an object or a material most often refers to the
maximum stress required to cause fracture or plastic deformation.
After repeating the experiment, we find that the breaking-strength
values of all specimens are not the same. We group the measured
values and calculate the mean and standard deviation to show the
variation of the strength values. That information shows that about
50% of the tested specimens have failed below this strength. If we
wanted to know the stress level below which 95% of specimens
of identical shape, size, and processing conditions would survive a
given fracture test, we would find that the mean and standard deviation cannot provide an exact value of the breaking strength wanted.
The reason is that calculation of the standard deviation is based on
the normal distribution of the strength values. We learn that crack
propagation initiated at the inherent surface flaws are the causes
of failure at the stress levels recorded. If the flaws are distributed
uniformly throughout the entire pool of specimens, then the breaking strength must be about the same for all specimens. The fact that
there is always a range of values indicates that flaws are clustered
inconsistently among test specimens. In addition, strength values
from mechanical tests are typically asymmetrical.
Let us assume that in a group of specimens, there is a definite
probability of fracture (Pf) occurring on each specimen when this
is subjected to a specified level of stress (σ), and the value of Pf
monotonously increases with the stress. For a group of specimens
tested, if each specimen had been subjected to a stress lower than
the lowest strength value of the group, the probability of any
specimen to fracture is Pf = 0, and if a stress greater than the
highest value of the group had been used, then Pf = 1. Therefore
each strength value of the group is associated with the Pf of the
specimen. The strength of a material can possibly be presented as
a distribution of values rather than as one specific mean value with
standard deviation. How do we formulate such a distribution?
Waloddi Weibull in 1937 devised a distribution function, now
known as the Weibull distribution, that fits the values of σ and
Pf discussed earlier and calculates the parameters. The following
equation is the two-parameter (σ0 and m) version of the Weibull
distribution:
  m 
Pf = 1 − exp  −  σ   ,
  σ0  

B
Fatigue strength at NF cycles

103

Mechanical Properties of Solids

(11)
109

Strain
(ε), % N
Cycles
to failure,
• Figure 4-15 Typical S–N curve of fatigue test. Curve A shows the material exhibiting an endurance limit. Curve B exhibits no well-defined endurance limit; however, the effective endurance limit (fatigue strength) can be
acquired by specifying the desired loading cycles (NF) before failure.

where Pf = fracture probability defined by the relation Pf = i/
(N + 1),
i = rank of the strength value σi,
N = total number of specimens in the sample,
m = shape parameter or Weibull modulus,
σ = fracture strength as measured, and
σ0 = scale parameter or characteristic strength.

78

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

1.0

Weibull Analyses

Cumulative probability of failure

0.9
0.8

A
B
C
D

0.7
0.6

D

0.5

Material

Characteristic
Parameter

Weibull
Modulus

Strength of 1%
Failure Rate

A
B
C
D

158.1
158.2
242.5
258.8

7.6
19.0
9.7
13.8

86.3
124.2
150.9
185.4

0.4

Descriptive Statistics

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
75

100

125

150

175

200

225

250

275

300

325

Material

Mean
Strength

Standard
Deviation

A
B
C
D

149.0
153.6
231.0
249.0

23.8
10.4
29.3
22.4

Biaxial flexural strength (MPa)

• Figure 4-16 Illustration of Weibull distribution. A, Weibull plot of four materials showing biaxial flexurestrength values with respect to the calculated probability of failure and the best-fit curve by equation (8).
B, Result of Weibull analyses and descriptive statistics of the same data set. (Experimental data courtesy
Dr. Hae-Hyoung Lee, reported in Choi B-J, Yoon S, IM Y-W, et al: Uniaxial/biaxial flexure strengths and
elastic properties of resin-composite block materials for CAD/CAM, Dent Mater 35:389–401, 2019.)

To use this equation, we first sort the strength data of a test
group with N specimens in the order of lowest to the highest and
assign each strength value a Pf value by dividing the rank (i) of the
strength value by (N + 1). The strength values with corresponding
Pf values were fitted in the distribution function to determine the
values of parameters σ0 and m. With the knowledge of these two
values, the stress of the projected failure rate can be calculated.
Figure 4-16 presents experimental data by Weibull distribution
and normal distribution.
These calculations are based on data obtained on a representative population (ideally 30 or more) of specimens tested in a
manner similar to that which the materials will experience during
clinical service. A low Weibull modulus value reflects a high variation in measured strength values with a high standard deviation
(materials A and C in Figure 4-16), and the size range of the material’s physical flaws, whether inherent to the material or resulting from the manufacturing process, are clustered inconsistently.
There is an increase in the probability that flaws will interact with
each other to weaken a brittle material. The use of these products
for prostheses will result in a greater variation in fracture force
and decreased reliability. Higher values of the Weibull modulus
correspond to a higher level of homogeneity of the material, such
as lower values of standard deviation, and greater reliability as a
structural material.
Weibull plots of cumulative probability of failure as a function
of fracture stress (Figure 4-16) can be used as a factor in the design
of dental restorations made from brittle biomedical materials. If a
dental practice specifies that less than 1 restoration in 100 could
fracture during use, the Weibull distribution data can be used to
estimate the stress that would cause this 1% level of failure. With
a knowledge of this 99% survival stress, the design of restorations
can be optimized by changing dimensions or restricting use conditions such that no region within the restoration sustains stresses
above the failure stress. The power of Weibull distribution will be
discussed further in Chapter 18, The Weibull Size Effect.

Properties of Surface Interactions
The loading situation shown in Figure 4-3 focuses on the stress
distributed through the restoration in response to external forces.
One may ask what is happening at the point of contact where
the force is applied. In fact, the material at the point of contact
responds differently from the rest of the material. If the applied
force is delivered by the cusp tip of the opposing tooth followed by
a horizontal movement, sliding occurs at the point of contact. The
localized response to an applied load is characterized by hardness;
however, the sliding results in friction at the interface and the restoration. Friction can cause wear of both objects involved. These
properties are discussed in the following sections.

Hardness
In mineralogy, the relative hardness of a substance is based on the
ability to resist surface scratching. In metallurgy and most other disciplines, the generally accepted concept of hardness is the “resistance
to penetration” by a well-defined configuration of indenter made
of a specific material. On the stress-strain curve, the material first
resists elastic deformation, yields after the elastic limit, and then
undergoes plastic deformation. When the indenter is removed, all
elastic deformation recovers, but a permanent marking is left. An
indentation produced on the surface of a material is the result of the
interaction of numerous properties, such as elastic modulus, compressive strength, proportional limit, and ductility. The tests most
frequently used in determining the hardness of dental materials are
known by the names Brinell, Rockwell, Vickers, Knoop, and Shore.
In the Brinell hardness test, a hardened steel ball is pressed
under a specified load into the polished surface of a material, as
diagrammed in Figure 4-17. The load is divided by the area of the
projected surface of the indentation, and the quotient is referred
to as the Brinell hardness number, usually abbreviated as BHN, or
HBW, when tungsten carbide ball is used. Thus for a given load,

CHAPTER 4

79

136
°
172°3

0'

6°
13

Mechanical Properties of Solids

0°
13

M

M

Ma
M

Brinell

Rockwell
(Brale)

Mb
Vickers

Knoop

• Figure 4-17 Shapes of hardness indenter (upper row) and the indentation depressions left in material
surfaces (lower row). The measured dimension M that is shown for each test is used to calculate hardness.
The following tests are shown: In the Brinell test, a steel ball is used, and the diameter of the indentation
is measured after removal of the indenter. In the Rockwell test, a conical indenter is impressed into the
surface under a minor load (dashed line) and a major load (solid line), and M is the difference between
the two penetration depths. In the Vickers or 136° diamond pyramid test, a pyramidal point is used, and
the diagonal length of the indentation is measured. In the Knoop test, a rhombohedral pyramid diamond tip
is used, and the long axis of the indentation is measured.

the smaller the indentation, the larger the number and the harder
the material.
The Rockwell hardness test is like the Brinell test in that a steel
ball or a conical diamond point is used (Figure 4-17). Instead of
measuring the area of indentation, the depth of penetration is measured directly by a dial gauge on the instrument. Different sizes of
indenters are available for testing a variety of materials. The Rockwell hardness number (abbreviated as RHN) is designated according to the indenter and load employed. The convenience of the
Rockwell test, with direct reading of the depth of the indentation,
has led to the wide usage of this test in industry. However, neither
the Brinell test nor the Rockwell test is suitable for brittle materials.
The Vickers hardness test uses a square-based pyramid
(Figure 4-17). Calculation of the Vickers hardness number (usually abbreviated as HV or VHN) is the same as that for the BHN
in that the load is divided by the projected area of indentation.
The lengths of the diagonals of the indentation are measured and
averaged. The test is suitable for determining the hardness of brittle materials; therefore this test has also been used for measuring
the hardness of other cast dental alloys and tooth structure.
The Knoop hardness test employs a diamond-tipped tool that is
cut in a geometrical configuration (Figure 4-17). The indentation is
rhombic in outline, and the length of the largest diagonal is measured. The load is divided by the projected area to give the Knoop
hardness number (usually abbreviated as HK or KHN). When the
indentation is made and the indenter is subsequently removed, the
shape of the Knoop indenter causes elastic recovery of the projected
indentation to occur primarily along the shorter diagonal. The
stresses are distributed in such a manner that only the dimensions
of the minor axis are subject to change by relaxation. Thus the hardness is virtually independent of the ductility of the tested material.
The Knoop and Vickers tests are classified as microhardness tests
in comparison with the Brinell and Rockwell macrohardness tests.
They give average hardness values over much larger areas. Both the
Knoop and Vickers tests employ loads of less than 9.8 N. The resulting indentations are small and limited to depths of less than 19 μm.
The Shore hardness test is for elastomers that do not yield
to permanent indentation for measurement. Instead, this test

measures the depth of an indentation in the material created by
a given force using a scale of 0 (soft) to 100 (hard). The principle
of the test is also based on resistance to indentation. The hardness
number is based on the depth of penetration of the indenter point
into the material. This hardness test is used mainly for the hardness of extraoral maxillofacial materials.

Friction and Wear (Tribology)
When we write on a blackboard with a piece of chalk, we feel
there is a resistance between the chalk and the blackboard. Meanwhile, we do not feel any stickiness between the chalk and the
blackboard as we lift the chalk between writing. This action leaves
a trail of chalk dust that adheres to the blackboard. If some cooking oil is spread on the board surface, we will feel less resistance
during writing and observe no trail of the dust on the board.
The resistance felt during writing is called friction. The friction
effects are those that arise from the tangential forces transmitted across the interface of contact when solid surfaces are pressed
together by our hands. No stickiness indicates there is no appreciable amount of adhesion between the chalk and the board. The
chalk dust is the result of the process of wear, and the trail is the
result of adhesion. The wear phenomena consist of the removal
of material from the surfaces of one of the contacting bodies as
a result of interaction with the other contacting body. Adhesion is the ability of contacting bodies to withstand tensile force
after being pressed together. The layer of oil on the board surface
keeps the chalk from contacting the blackboard, which effectively
eliminates wear of the chalk. In engineering terms, this process
is called lubrication. In dental material manipulation, this behavior has been used to keep materials from sticking together. For
example, a separating medium is used to keep denture resin from
adhering to the gypsum mold in denture processing (Chapter 11,
Preparation of the Mold).
Tribology is the term referring to the study and application
of the principles of friction, wear, and lubrication. The following
segment focuses on friction and wear as they occur during clinical
service.

80

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Friction
Friction is the force that opposes the relative motion that exists
when a solid object is moved tangentially with respect to the surface of another that this object touches or when an attempt is
made to produce such motion. Although friction is an obstacle to
motion, the presence of friction makes the completion of certain
tasks possible. We fight against friction as we walk or drive to a
destination; however, we need the friction to stop the motion when
we reach the destination. In the dental office, operators holding
various instruments in their hands, such as a tool for condensing
amalgam or scaling teeth, cannot carry out their work if the friction
between the operator’s hand and the instrument is too low. When
this occurs, we call that condition “slippery.” Take the RPD as an
example, the friction between the retentive clasp and the abutment
tooth plays an important role in keeping the RPD stable.
Mechanism of Friction

Macroscopically, a surface may look shiny as light is reflected well
from the surface. The same surface in submicron scale could look like
a mountain terrain filled with peaks called asperities (Figure 4-18).
Consider two solid materials stacked upon each other; there are
points of contact called asperity junctions (Figure 4-18, A), and the
sum of the areas of all the junctions constitute the real area of contact, Ar. The interfacial area between the two surfaces is known as
the apparent surface area (Aa) as observed by our eyes.
Because the real area of contact is only a small fraction of
the apparent surface area, the stress at each junction could be
one or several magnitudes higher than that calculated using
the apparent surface area. One or both materials may be plastically deformed. The harder asperity will dent the softer one, as
shown in Figure 4-18, B, when additional load is applied. Recall
the discussion in Chapter 2, Types of Bonding, that attractions
between atoms and molecules occur at a very short range, on the
order of magnitude of only a few Angstroms. If both surfaces are
free of contaminants, the stress at the asperity/asperity interface
can be high enough to cause bonding at the atomic or molecular level, forming asperity junctions. To begin sliding between

A

opposing surfaces, these junctions need to be broken. As the
sliding continues, asperities of opposing surfaces collide, which
can result in fracture of the weaker asperities or harder asperities
plowing through the softer surface. The combined effort to make
the object move is reflected in the frictional force.
The friction is expressed in quantitative terms as a force. The
initial force needed to start sliding is called static friction, and the
force needed to continue sliding is called kinetic friction. The force
required to begin sliding is greater than the force needed to keep
the object sliding.
Laws of Sliding Friction

The following are the laws of friction expressing the magnitude
of the friction force as a function of macroscopically observable
variables: the applied load, the size of the region of contact, and
the sliding velocity:
1. The friction force F is proportional to the normal force P:
F = μP. This relationship enables us to calculate the coefficients of static friction, μs, and kinetic friction, μk.
2. The friction force is independent of the apparent area of
contact, Aa. Thus large and small objects have the same
coefficients of friction. Keep in mind that the interaction that
occurs at the real areas of contact is what contributes to friction. Additional load increases the real area of contact but not
the apparent area of contact (Figure 4-18, B).
3. The kinetic friction force is independent of the sliding velocity. This implies that the force needed to maintain sliding is
the same at any specified velocity.
Friction plays important roles in various dental appliances and
instruments. For example, we can consider static friction as a mechanism for preventing a restoration from falling off its intended location.

Wear
Wear may be defined as the removal of material from solid surfaces as a result of mechanical action. The wear process is generally
thought of as destructive because it often leads to failure of prostheses or appliances. In fact, there are a considerable number of
practical uses for the wear process. Here are some examples where
controlled wear is needed to accomplish the work: In the making
of a composite restoration, there is a need to shape the restoration
and finish to a pleasing appearance. Finishing involves a sequence
of abrasive processes. Among these are the use of burs, abrasive
paper, and finally, loose abrasive grains to achieve a very smooth
surface. In cutting operations as part of cavity preparation, having
a sharp edge for the cutting tool is essential. If during the operation, the edge becomes blunted, cutting no longer occurs; the process must be stopped, and the edge must be re-formed.
Types of Wear

B
• Figure 4-18 Microscopical aspect of the interface between two objects. A, The weight of the top object is supported by the bottom object
at the points of contact. B, Additional pressure causing more deformation
of the bottom object and additional areas of contact. This illustration indicates that the top object is harder than the bottom one. If one is to slide
the top object horizontally to the right, it needs to overcome the obstacles
of the bottom object at the areas of contact. The force needed to break
through is the friction, and fracture of asperities of either object at the
contact could occur. The residue of fracture asperities is the wear debris.

Research has established that there are four main forms of wear:
(1) adhesive, (2) abrasive, (3) corrosive, and (4) surface-fatigue
wear. Each wear process obeys its own laws; however, on many
occasions, one of the modes of wear acts in such a way as to affect
the others.
Adhesive wear results from the strong bonding that occurs
whenever atoms or molecules come into intimate contact under
pressure. The asperity junctions are broken near the interface
within one of the materials during sliding. In consequence, a
transferred fragment will be formed. That fragment might be broken off when this fragment collides with another asperity from
the opposing material. The repeated process of asperity-junction

CHAPTER 4

formation, fracture near the junction, and detachment of transferred fragments yields debris of adhesive wear.
Abrasive wear arises when a hard, rough surface slides against a
softer surface, digs into this surface, and plows a series of grooves.
The material originally in the grooves is normally removed in
the form of loose fragments, or else the material forms a pair of
mounds along each groove. A harder surface is less likely to wear
than a softer surface because the harder surface resists denting,
but the softer surface does not. This is known as two-body abrasive
wear. Abrasive wear can also arise in a somewhat different situation, when hard, abrasive particles are introduced between sliding
surfaces and abrade material from each surface. The mechanism
of this form of abrasive wear seems to be that an abrasive grain
adheres temporarily to one of the sliding surfaces or is embedded
in the material and plows out a groove in the other. This is known
as three-body abrasive wear.
Corrosive wear occurs in situations where the environment
surrounding a sliding surface interacts chemically with the surface. If the products of reaction are worn off the surface, corrosive
wear has occurred. The first stage of corrosive wear is corrosive
attack of the surface, which is identical with ordinary corrosion.
Some corrosion processes can result in a protective layer that
slows down the corrosion process, such as with aluminum, titanium, and alloys with sufficient chromium. The second step of
the corrosive wear process consists of wearing away the reaction
product film, as a result of sliding, and exposing a fresh surface
for corrosive attack.
Surface-fatigue wear is closely related to the general phenomenon of fatigue of materials in that there is a characteristic interrelation between the stresses in the contacting materials and the
number of cycles required to produce fracture. As stressing and
unstressing of the material of occluding continue, a subsurface
crack propagates. For a long time, the material appears to be quite
unaffected by this stress cycling, but suddenly, perhaps after a
few hundred thousand hours of loading, a particle spalls off the
surface, and thereafter, deterioration of the surface and flaking of
fragments become rapid.
There are a few marginal processes that are often classified as
forms of wear that include actions of fretting, erosion, cavitation,
and impact. Each type describes a different way in which the load
and sliding action are introduced. Briefly, fretting wear arises when
contacting surfaces undergo oscillatory tangential displacement of
small amplitude. Erosion wear is a process in which a particle carried in a fluid medium hits a solid surface and removes material
from this surface. Cavitation-erosion wear occurs as a result of the
cavitation of a liquid. The liquid is put through a cycle of compression, then tension, and then compression again, and so on.
Impact wear is a short sliding motion, such as grit-blasting, where
two solid bodies interact for an exceptionally short time interval.
Factors Influencing Abrasive Wear

The amount of abrasive wear in volume loss (V) is found to be
proportional to the size of the actual contact area. This actual contact area is proportional to the pressure applied (P) and inversely
proportional to the hardness of the surface (H). In addition, the
wear increases as the distance of travel by one surface increases.
In dentistry, the distance is often in the form of the chewing
cycle (N). Mathematically, the relationship is expressed as V ∝
(N.P/H). This equation does not necessarily hold true in all cases
but clearly points out the influence of three major factors on wear.
In reality, many other factors may be involved in the wear process,

Mechanical Properties of Solids

81

such as surface roughness, temperature, and environment (e.g.,
moisture). Roughness increases the actual contact area and the
wear. Polishing to attain a smooth surface is highly advisable to
reduce wear. The thermal properties of the surface become important when sliding takes place at high speeds, such as grinding and
polishing. The oral environment provides natural lubrication that
reduces wear. Soft foods reduce wear because they serve to cushion and lubricate during mastication. The resulting wear debris
may be washed away by saliva or may be trapped between the two
opposing surfaces, creating so-called three-body abrasive wear.
This phenomenon occurs when the diet is impregnated with fine,
solid particles and during brushing of the teeth with an abrasive.
Improvement of Wear Resistance

According to the mathematical relationship described in the last
section, hardness is the only material-related factor that can be
altered to influence wear behavior. For polymers, there are two ways
to improve wear resistance: one is to increase the molecular weight
during polymerization, and the other is to incorporate fine particles
of high strength and hardness. For example, the wear resistance of
resin composite is substantially improved by the addition of fine
ceramic particles or glass beads and increasing the degree of cure of
the resin during polymerization (Chapter 5, Fillers). To reduce the
impact of wear, the selection of the opposing material is of paramount importance. For example, porcelain teeth should not be
allowed to oppose natural dentition or resin composite restorations.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why do prostheses sometimes fail under a very small force even though the
strength of the prosthetic material is relatively great?

Strength of Tooth Structure
The relatively wide variation in mechanical properties of human
tooth structure is attributed to the technical problems associated
with preparing and testing such small specimens, which in some
instances are less than 1 mm in length. The results reported in one
study are shown in Table 4-1. This study investigated the effect
of enamel-rod orientation by propagating cracks in the occlusal
surface and in axial sections in directions parallel and perpendicular to the occlusal surface. The cracks in the axial enamel
section were longer in the direction perpendicular to the occlusal
surface rather than parallel to the surface. The cracks that propagated toward the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) were arrested
and did not penetrate the DEJ into dentin. The fracture toughness of dentin varied by a factor of 3 as a function of enamel-rod
orientation. The elastic modulus of enamel also varied between
the occlusal surface and the axial section. The results of this study
demonstrate that the mechanical properties of tooth structure are
a function of microstructural orientation. Indentation energy is a
recently introduced property that is used to predict the machinability and wear behavior of ceramics. Research data suggest that
during indentation or cutting, brittle enamel may be removed
by microfracture, whereas dentin may be removed by forming
ductile chips.
Although the data in Table 4-1 indicate a variation in the properties of enamel and dentin from one type of tooth to another, the
difference is more likely the result of variations within individual
teeth than between teeth. The properties of enamel vary somewhat

82

PA RT I

TABLE 4-1

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Properties of Tooth Structure (Human Third Molars)

Microhardness Indentation Method

Occlusal Enamel

Axial Enamel

Dentin

Hardness (GPa)

3.23

3.03

0.58

Toughness (MPa.m1/2)

0.77

0.52 (⊥) 1.30 ( ⎜⎜)

—

Hardness (GPa)

3.62

3.37

0.57

Toughness (MPa.m1/2)

94

80

20

Indentation energy (µJ)

2.6

2.7

7.5

⊥, Enamel axial section perpendicular to occlusal surface; ⎜⎜, enamel axial section parallel to occlusal surface.
From Xu HHK, Smith DT, Jahanmir S, Romberg E, Kelly JR, Thompson VP, Rekow ED: Indentation damage and mechanical properties of human enamel and dentin. J Dent Res 77:472–480, 1998.

with the position on the tooth; that is, occlusal enamel is stronger
than enamel on other surfaces of the tooth. Also, the properties of
enamel vary according to the microscopic structure. For example,
enamel is stronger under longitudinal compression than when
subjected to lateral compression. On the other hand, the properties of dentin appear to be independent of structure, regardless of
the direction of compressive stress.
The tensile properties of tooth structure have also been measured. Dentin is considerably stronger in tension (50 MPa) than
enamel (10 MPa). Although the compressive strengths of enamel
and dentin are comparable, the proportional limit and modulus of
elasticity of enamel are greater than the corresponding values for
dentin. The higher modulus of elasticity of enamel results in less
resilience compared with dentin.
Typically, the energy of a biting or chewing event is absorbed
by the food bolus during mastication and by the teeth, periodontal ligament, and bone. Also, the design of the tooth enables the
tooth to absorb significant static and dynamic (impact) energies.
As can be seen in Figure 4-7, the modulus of resilience of dentin is
greater than that of enamel and is better able to absorb impact
energy. Enamel is a brittle substance with a comparatively high
modulus of elasticity, a low proportional limit in tension, and a
low modulus of resilience.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the difference in appearance between a stress-strain graph for a
material that has high strength, high stiffness, and high ductility and one for a
material that is weak, flexible, and more brittle?

Selection of Dental Materials
Deciding on the best treatment option is a multifactor task that
involves the condition of the tooth to be restored, the patient’s
condition and desire for an esthetic appearance, and the clinician’s
preference and prior experience. The next step is selecting the type
of restorative material made of any of the four general classes of
materials discussed in Chapter 2. The design of the prosthesis or
the cavity preparation often depends on the physical (Chapter 3)
and mechanical characteristics of the type of material selected. The
goal is to distribute the stresses uniformly within the prosthesis or
the supporting tooth or tissue substrates and avoid stress concentration for the longevity of the restorations. You will learn more about
the principles of design in respective operative and prosthodontic
classes. Here, we examine how to select suitable materials based
on their mechanical characteristics to facilitate treatment options.

When the responses of materials to external forces are observed
from a stress point of view, they are described in terms of proportional limit, elastic limit, yield strength (proof stress), ultimate
strength, and breaking strength. If the concern is about deformation, they are described as brittle or ductile, and their flexibility, ductility, and malleability are measured. If the ability of the
devices to dissipate impact energy during service is required, their
moduli of resilience and toughness must be calculated. All categories of these descriptions can include fracture. When a restoration
fractures, should this be attributed to a lack of strength, shortness
in ductility, or not enough toughness? The answer depends on the
function of the prosthesis and how the material fractured. The
fracture of a mesial-occlusal-distal (MOD) composite restoration
resulting in the loss of a proximal box could have been caused
by poor preparation design that led to a stress concentration that
eventually weakened the strength of the restoration. During the
adjustment of the clasp of an RPD, we can easily break the clasp
after numerous episodes of adjustment, but pulling the clasp apart
by tension would be impossible. Continuous bending of the clasp
consumed this material’s ductility and resulted in the fracture of
the clasp as the ductility was exhausted. A denture that is accidentally dropped on a hard floor and breaks indicates that the denture
cannot absorb all the energy from impact, and that this excess
energy is dissipated by the denture fracturing. Depending on the
potential mode of fracture, the selection criteria could change.
Fracture is not the only concern for material selection. From the
previous discussion of the three-unit FDP (Figure 4-3, A), we realize that elastic deformation occurs in the form of flexing as load is
applied on the pontic. Flexing can cause the two abutment teeth to
be pulled laterally toward the pontic. This action can cause loosening of the abutment teeth or cement debonding over time. If the
span of the FDP increases as additional pontic units are added, the
degree of flexing multiplies. Using a material of greater elastic modulus will limit the elastic deformation relative to the force applied.
For RPDs, the metal framework needs to be rigid to maintain the
denture’s fit for uniform distribution of the stresses on the supporting soft tissues. Rigidity of the framework can be achieved with
proper design and the selection of materials that have greater elastic
modulus. The retentive clasp discussed earlier may require mechanical properties that are different from that of the framework, especially the ability to be adjusted without fracture. The framework
and the retentive clasps can be made separately and joined together
later through soldering. Even though high elastic moduli are often
associated with high-strength materials, it is important to emphasize that the elastic modulus addresses only the correlation of the
stress and strain during the elastic deformation. We will discuss in

CHAPTER 4

2400

83

300
270

2100

Zirconia
x
E = 210 GPa
CS = 2000 MPa

240

1800
x

210
1500

Stress (MPa)

Mechanical Properties of Solids

CAD/CAM Block
for Inlay
E = 25.0 GPa
FS = 216 MPa

180

1200

Resin-based
Composite
x E = 11.3 GPa
FS = 150 MPa

150
120

Co-Cr Alloy for
Partial
E = 234 GPa
PL = 510 MPa
Ductility = 5%

900

600

x
90
60

Type IV Gold
E = 95 GPa
PL = 505 MPa
Ductility = 8%

300

Heat-cured
Denture Resin
E = 2.6 GPa
FS = 99 MPa

30

0

0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

0.0

1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

Strain (%)

• Figure 4-19 Stress-strain curves of six commercial products representing four general classes of materials. The mechanical properties shown are elastic modulus (E), proportional limit (PL), flexure strength
(FS), compressive strength (CS), and ductility.

Chapter 13, Elasticity and Viscoelasticity, that an elastic modulus
much lower than those of metals and ceramics is essential for making impressions.
The stress-strain curves of six commercial products for four
classes of materials are shown in Figure 4-19 in two plots. Most
of the restorative materials available are brittle, except for metals.
We should emphasize that brittle simply refers to the inability of
a material to deform plastically before fracture. Brittleness is not
associated with the strength of a material, even though most highstrength materials used in dentistry are brittle. The brittle nature
with a high elastic limit makes zirconia suitable for compression
loading. Normally, zirconia is not recommended for constructing bridges. With improvements in fracture toughness, zirconia is
being used to make bridges, but these require a larger cross section for connectors. Co-Cr alloys for RPDs have the highest elastic
modulus and can retain adequate rigidity with less bulk of material.
Tensile-strength values may not be meaningful because the framework will fail to function as soon as it is plastically deformed. The
5% ductility of Co-Cr alloy shown in Figure 4-19 means that if the
retentive clasp is made of this alloy, the ductility should allow a few
adjustments of the clasp. Type IV gold has an elastic modulus high
enough to resist flexing of FDPs made from this material. The high
yield strength is good for preventing plastic deformation but may
prove disadvantageous if one needs to burnish the margin. Solidstate transformation can be used (Chapter 2, Solid-State Reactions
in High Noble and Noble Alloy Systems) to soften the alloy, making the process of burnishing the margins easier. The process of age
hardening will bring the alloy back to a higher elastic modulus and

high yield strength for normal use. The hardness of the material
usually increases along with the elastic modulus. These alloys have
elastic moduli 3 to 7 times that of the enamel (E = 33.6 GPa). One
should consider the impact of the potential hardness of the metal
on the opposing restoration or tooth structure.
The right plot in Figure 4-19 shows one denture resin and
two composites. The computer-aided design/computer-aided
manufacturing (CAD-CAM) block in this diagram is a highly
filled composite designed for digital milling. In the discussion
regarding stress concentration, the use of restorative materials of
similar elastic modulus to that of the tooth was noted as desirable. The elastic moduli of both the resin and composite materials are between those of enamel and dentine. Some composites
have elastic moduli as low as that of the denture resin shown in
Figure 4-19. Because they have elastic moduli lower than that of
enamel, they are not likely to induce excessive wear on the natural
dentition. Denture resin has the lowest elastic modulus with the
highest flexibility. Denture bases are not bound in a limited space
like tooth cavity preparations. They are resting on soft tissue and
may flex more than fixed restorations. Greater flexibility allows
them to flex without the risk of fracture. The mechanical properties of these restorative materials and how their properties are used
will be discussed in the respective chapters.
The magnitude of mastication forces is unknown for individual
patients, to the extent that the dentist cannot estimate the stresses
that will be induced in dental restorations. However, patients
who exhibit evidence of extreme bruxism represent a higher-risk
population for the fracture of brittle restorative materials. The

84

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

knowledge of the relationships between the properties of restorative materials known to exhibit excellent long-term survival performance is constantly reinforced by clinical experience. As is true
for the field of engineering, the dental profession is aware that the
best test of a successful restorative material is the test of time under
actual clinical conditions.

Acknowledgment

Selected Readings

Irwin G: Analysis of stresses and strains near the end of a crack traversing
a plate, J Apple Mech 24:361–364, 1957.
Based on the shortcomings of Griffith’s theory for ductile materials,
Irwin modified Griffith’s equations by accounting for inelastic behavior at the crack tips.
Lund JR, Byrne JP: Leonardo da Vinci’s tensile strength tests: Implications for the discovery of engineering mechanics, Civil Eng Environ
Syst 18:243–250, 2001.
Rabinowicz E: Friction and Wear of Materials, 2nd ed, New York, 1995,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Stanford JW, Weigel KV, Paffenbarger GD, et al: Compressive properties
of hard tooth tissue, J Am Dent Assoc 60:746–756, 1960.
Although this study was published in 1960, it remains one of the most
authoritative references on the mechanical properties of tooth structure.
Van Vlack LH: Elements of Materials Science and Engineering, 6th ed,
Reading, MA, 1989, Addison-Wesley.
This reference book presents an overview of the structure of matter,
the properties of materials, and engineering.
Weibull W: A statistical theory of the strength of materials. Ingeniörsvetenskapakademiens. Handlinger Nr. 151, Generalstabens Litografiska
Anstalts Förlag, 1939, Stockholm.

Callister WD, Rethwisch DG: Materials Science and Engineering: An
Introduction, Hoboken, NJ, 2009, John Wiley & Sons.
Davis JR (Ed): Metals Handbook, Desk Edition, Metals Park, OH, 1998,
ASM International.
This handbook provides a comprehensive overview of metals and
metal technology including properties and selection criteria, processing information, and testing and inspection guidelines on failure
analysis, mechanical testing, nondestructive testing, metallography,
fractography, and quality control.
Frechette VD: Failure Analysis of Brittle Materials, Westerville, OH, 1990,
The American Ceramic Society.
This classic textbook on fracture surface analysis provides an excellent
overview of fractographic techniques. Since many dental materials are
brittle in nature, the identification of fracture patterns and the crack
origin are useful to identify the principal sites of crack initiation.
Griffith AA: The phenomena of rupture and flow in solids, Philos Trans
Royal Soc A 221:163–198, 1920.
Griffith proposed that minute cracks in a general glass act as a stress raiser
that reduces the theoretical strength of glass to 1% of that predicted for its
theoretical strength. He also concluded that the magnitude of the fracture
stress and the square root of the critical flaw depth was a constant.

The author wishes to acknowledge Dr. Kenneth J. Anusavice for
his contribution to the earlier editions of this chapter.

Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Callister WD, Rethwisch DG: Materials Science and Engineering: An
Introduction, Hoboken, NJ, 2009, John Wiley & Sons.
Davis JR (Ed): Metals Handbook, Desk Edition, Metals Park, OH, 1998,
ASM International.
This handbook provides a comprehensive overview of metals and
metal technology including properties and selection criteria, processing information, and testing and inspection guidelines on failure
analysis, mechanical testing, nondestructive testing, metallography,
fractography, and quality control.
Frechette VD: Failure Analysis of Brittle Materials, Westerville, OH, 1990,
The American Ceramic Society.
This classic textbook on fracture surface analysis provides an excellent overview of fractographic techniques. Since many dental materials are brittle in nature, the identification of fracture patterns and
the crack origin are useful to identify the principal sites of crack
initiation.
Griffith AA: The phenomena of rupture and flow in solids, Philos Trans
Royal Soc A 221:163–198, 1920.
Griffith proposed that minute cracks in a general glass act as a stress
raiser that reduces the theoretical strength of glass to 1% of that predicted for its theoretical strength. He also concluded that the magnitude

of the fracture stress and the square root of the critical flaw depth was
a constant.
Irwin G: Analysis of stresses and strains near the end of a crack traversing
a plate, J Apple Mech 24:361–364, 1957.
Based on the shortcomings of Griffith’s theory for ductile materials,
Irwin modified Griffith’s equations by accounting for inelastic behavior at the crack tips.
Lund JR, Byrne JP: Leonardo da Vinci’s tensile strength tests: Implications for the discovery of engineering mechanics, Civil Eng Environ
Syst 18:243–250, 2001.
Rabinowicz E: Friction and Wear of Materials, 2nd ed, New York, 1995,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Stanford JW, Weigel KV, Paffenbarger GD, et al: Compressive properties
of hard tooth tissue, J Am Dent Assoc 60:746–756, 1960.
Although this study was published in 1960, it remains one of the most
authoritative references on the mechanical properties of tooth structure.
Van Vlack LH: Elements of Materials Science and Engineering, 6th ed, Reading, MA, 1989, Addison-Wesley.
This reference book presents an overview of the structure of matter, the
properties of materials, and engineering.
Weibull W: A statistical theory of the strength of materials. Ingeniörsvetenskapakademiens. Handlinger Nr. 151, Generalstabens Litografiska
Anstalts Förlag, 1939, Stockholm.

84.e1

Part II

Direct Restorative Materials
5 Resin-Based Composites, 87
6 Bonding and Bonding Agents, 115
7 Dental Cements, 128
8 Dental Amalgams, 153

85

