15

Digital Technology in Dentistry

C
OH
UA
TP
L ITNEER O U T L I N E
Outline
IntraoralLevel
Digital
One
Scanner
Outline Level
Prototyping
ToolsTwo
Outline Level Two Outline Two
Outline Level 3
K E Y Outline
TERM
Level
S3

Outline
Diagnostic
Level
Systems
One Level One
TheOutline
Future Level Two Outline Two
Outline Level Two
Outline Level 3
Outline Level 3

Additive manufacturing (AM) A process of constructing objects
where material is incrementally added according to a computerK Eaided
Y T design
E R M (CAD)
S file; also known as three-dimensional (3-D)
keyprinting.
term this the is defininition of the key term that precedes this
Augmented
the is defininition
reality (AR)
of theAkey
form
term
of virtual
that precedes
reality in which interactkeying
this
with
thethe
is defininition
real world isofthrough
the key simulation.
term
key
Computer-aided
term this thedesign
is defininition
(CAD) of
A computer
the key term
technology
that precedes
that this
the
designs
is defininition
an object of
and
the
creates
key term
a computer
that precedes
file for manufacture
keyofterm
the design.
defininition of the key term that precedes this the is
Computer-aided
defininition of the
manufacturing
key term that(or
precedes
milling) (CAM) The use of
software and computer-controlled machinery to automate a
manufacturing process.
Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) An x-ray threedimensional (3-D) imaging technology in which the radiation is
divergent and forms a cone.
Digital An electronic technology that records or stores information in the form of binary digits (i.e., 1 and 0) or technology
characterized by electronic and computerized devices (e.g.,
digital images).
Digital impression A virtual scan (digital model) of a patient’s
dentition and other structures that is generated with laser or

other optical scanning devices and converted into a digital
format.
Fused deposition modeling (FDM) A three-dimensional (3-D)
term
printing
a short
process
definition
thatto
uses
follow
a continuous filament of a thermokeyplastic
term material;
this the isalso
defininition
known asoffused
the key
filament
term fabrication
that precedes
(FFF)
this
or
the
filament
is defininition
freeform fabrication.
of the key term that precedes
key
Prototyping
this the isThe
defininition
creation,of
modification,
the key termand optimization of twokeydimensional
term this the
or is
three-dimensional
defininition of themodels
key term
of objects,
that precedes
whichthis
may
the
be the
is defininition
final desired
ofobject
the key
orterm
an interim
that precedes
object for examination
of fit.
Quantitative light-induced fluorescence (QLF) A nondestructive
diagnostic method for the detection and assessment of early
carious lesions.
Subtractive manufacturing (SM) A process of making 3D
objects by successively removing material from a solid block
of metal, ceramic, polymer, or composite using computeraided standard machining processes, such as turning, drilling
or milling.
Virtual reality (VR) A computer-generated simulation that allows
for interactive experiences.

Digital dentistry is the use of dental technologies or devices that
incorporate digital or computer-controlled components to carry
out dental procedures rather than using materials and mechanical
or electrical tools. The use of digital dentistry can make carrying out
dental procedures more efficient than the use of mechanical tools.
A variety of digital devices, such as intraoral and facial scanners,
cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT), software for computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-aided manufacturing
(or milling) (CAM), and three-dimensional (3-D) printing provide
new potential alternatives to replace the manual tasks and improve
the quality of care and patient experiences. These technologies have
several advantages, including accurate and time-saving measurement, electronic storage, and file transmission to automate processes.

Intraoral Digital Scanner

CRITICAL QUESTION
How are digital impressions made, and what are their applications in
dentistry?

326

Intraoral scanner/cameras, similar in size to a dental mirror, are
able to show tooth surfaces in 3-D rather than two-dimensional
(2-D) photographic images. Such cameras are used in the dental
office, without the help of a dental technician. The clear images
enable color matching, diagnostic tasks, orthodontic and implant
placement, and digital impressions.

Digital Impressions
Intraoral scanners use light to create accurate 3-D records of the
dental arches, using only a beam of infrared light, that are digitally
recorded. Such digital impressions almost instantly re-create the
positive impression of a patient’s dentition and other structures in a
digital format. In contrast, conventional impressions require placing
a tray of impression material over the dental arches to create an intaglio of the dentition, from which a positive model must be made.

CHAPTER 15

Digital impression techniques are a clinically acceptable alternative
to conventional impression methods in the fabrication of crowns and
short fixed dental prostheses (FDPs) and implant-supported crowns.
Digital impressions are faster, are more comfortable for patients, and
shorten chair time. However, digital impressions are currently less
accurate for full-mouth and edentulous-jaw impressions.

Color Matching
A physical shade guide is the traditional means of matching a
patient’s teeth to restorative materials. However, differences often
occur in shade matching as a result of variations among observers
(dentist, technician, patient) and sources of illumination. Digital
cameras have improved both dental laboratory communication
and patient satisfaction. Such images are needed for the selection
of materials, as discussed in the CAM section that follows.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What is prototyping?
What are subtractive and additive processes, and what are their relative
advantages and disadvantages?

Prototyping Tools
Prototyping technology is based on using computer software and
systems to assist in the creation, modification, analysis, and optimization of 2-D or 3-D models of objects. Any computer program
that includes computer graphics and engineering functions for
manipulation can be classified as CAD software. CAM in dentistry
is the construction of a restorative device using the output from
the CAD software. CAM may be additive (buildup of a material)
or subtractive (removal of material from a larger starting piece).

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which dental applications can be used with CAD-CAM technology?

Indications for CAD-CAM
Many indications and materials are available for chairside CADCAM restorations, as shown in the list that follows. Each type of
material offers unique features for its indications. The CAD-CAM
system represents the process by which these materials are fabricated, and the clinical outcome of the restoration is determined by
the restorative material.
• Ceramic-, metal-, and resin-based crowns and bridges
• Copings and frameworks for metal-ceramic prostheses
• Full and partial dentures
• Inlays, onlays, partial crowns, and provisionals
• Implant abutments and crowns, including screw-retained crowns
• Orthodontic printed models and clear appliances
• Maryland bridges and veneers

Subtractive Manufacturing—CAM Milling
Machines
CAD-CAM crown fabrication was the first subtractive manufacturing introduced to dentistry in late 1980s. With CAD-CAM technology in a dental office, a patient may receive a crown with the

Digital Technology in Dentistry

327

same-day delivery and reduced chairside adjustments. Representative
CAD-CAM systems are offered by Dentsply Sirona (CEREC) and
Planmeca USA (Emerald). This group of equipment can be used to
fabricate ceramic and composite inlays, onlays, crowns, and veneers
from an optical impression of the prepared tooth made from a digital
impression. The restoration is designed using the system’s software
and milled from a solid block of ceramic or composite using diamond
and carbide burs. Restorations and prostheses may be prepared in a
single appointment, which eliminates the impression material, preparation of a model, preparation of a provisional restoration, and laboratory fabrication of the final restoration or prosthesis.

CAD-CAM Systems
Today’s dental CAD-CAM systems can be divided into four
groups. The first group is the chairside systems, such as CEREC
from Dentsply Sirona and Emerald from Planmeca USA. The
Primescan (Dentsply Sirona) uses blue light-emitting diode
(LED) light and smart pixel sensor video imaging for 24 frames
per second and processes more than 1 million 3-D data points per
second. The Emerald uses a multicolor laser-based system.
The second group is the commercial laboratory systems. For
these systems, the dentist should send physical impressions, master models, or raw scans to the laboratory of choice for the fabrication of the final prosthesis.
The chairside system usually operates on a closed-architecture
format, which requires the scan to be used only within the manufacturer’s proprietary CAD-CAM workflow, and this system uses
its own specific file format for CAD-CAM functions. The laboratory system uses an open-architecture format that allows a variety of file formats, such as STL, OBJ, and PLY. The STL is the
most popular file format in the field. The scan data can be easily
exported as an STL file format compared with other file formats.
The third group is stand-alone digital impression systems. This
type of system is based on an open-architecture format and takes
only intra- or extraoral scans. The raw file format is electronically transferred to a designated commercial laboratory for the
fabrication of the final prosthesis. The Medit i500 (Medit Corp)
works based on 3-D video technology. The TRIOS 3 (3Shape)
uses fast confocal microscopy optical scanning technology. The
iTero (Align Technology) uses laser light beams based on parallel confocal microscope technology. The True Definition Scanner
(Midmark) uses structured pulsating blue light with active wavefront sampling 3-D video technology. The CS 3600 (Carestream
Dental) uses LED light with active-speed 3-D video technology.
The fourth group is hybrid systems; these are a kind of mixand-match system based on an open-architecture format. A hybrid
system allows communication between products of many different
manufacturers, such as intra- and extraoral scanners, CAD units,
and CAM units. The dentist and laboratory can choose their preferred scanners, CAD-CAM software, computer hardware, 3-D
printers, and milling machines from a variety of vendors.
The common disadvantages of the laboratory, digital impression, and hybrid systems are the need for multiple clinical
appointments, the making of physical impressions, the fabrication
of provisionals, the increased total costs of fabrication, and the
delayed delivery time compared with the chairside systems.
CAD-CAM Materials
All classes of dental materials, including ceramics, polymers, and
metals, can be processed with CAD-CAM systems. In this chapter, ceramics are discussed, which is the most widely used material,
among others.

328

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

The CAD-CAM ceramics can be categorized into three main
groups, mainly by the glass content, and subgroups by the type of
material, as follows:
• Aesthetic ceramics with high glass content
Aluminosilicate (feldspathic or synthetic)—This material is a
mixture of high-melting glasses, nepheline, and albite,
such as the Mark II (VITA North America).
Lucite (40% to 50%) containing glass—The typical material of
this group is IPS e.max (Ivoclar Vivadent).
• Structural ceramics with low glass content
Lithia disilicate and zirconia reinforced lithia silicate—This
material group includes e.max CAD (Ivoclar Vivadent),
Suprinity (VITA North America), and Celtra Duo
(Dentsply Sirona).
Alumina, spinel, and alumina/zirconia—This material group
comprises In-Ceram Alumina, In-Ceram Spinel, and InCeram Zirconia (VITA North America).
• Structural ceramics without glass content
Polycrystalline alumina (with 3 wt% Mg for grain growth
control)—This material group includes VITA All-Cubes
(VITA North America).
Polycrystalline zirconia (with 3 to 5 wt% of Y for transformation toughening)—This material group includes VITA
YZ HT (VITA North America), CEREC Zirconia Blocks
(Dentsply Sirona), IPS e.max ZirCAD LT (Ivoclar Vivadent), and KATANA Zirconia Blocks (Kuraray America).

CAD-CAM Case
The advantage of the chairside CAD-CAM systems is that the
dentist can create any preparation design to preserve tooth structure as long as enough enamel structure remains for desirable
adhesion between the ceramic and the enamel. Because one-visit
CAD-CAM dentistry does not require provisional restorations
and temporary cement, contamination of the prepared tooth
structure is minimized, and the dentist can gain strong bonding
for optimal results.
The following clinical case demonstrates a CAD-CAM chairside partial-coverage (inlay or onlay) crown. The occlusal surface
of an existing resin composite restoration shows the existence of
a large marginal gap but without radiographic evidence of recurrent caries. After the old resin composite restoration was removed,
lesions of recurrent caries were revealed. The tooth was prepared
to receive a ceramic onlay. Once the cavity preparation was completed (Figure 15-1, A), the intraoral scans of the prepared tooth
were made (Figure 15-1, B). Scans of the unprepared teeth of the
opposing arch and the buccal bite registration were also taken (not
shown). The next step includes the occlusal relation adjustment
(Figure 15-1, C) and the design of the prosthesis (Figure 15-1,
D). The final preview of the milling process prior to the actual
manufacturing process is shown in Figure 15-1, E. The CADCAM restorations were then tried and inserted with dual-cure
resin cement. The final occlusal photo (Figure 15-1, F) shows a
well-integrated aesthetic ceramic restoration.

All materials presented here can be processed by either a chairside or a laboratory milling machine. The commercial labs use disks
for bulk production of multiple units, and chairside milling units
work with individual blocks. The manufacturers produce only feldspathic (aluminosilicate) blocks for chairside milling. Thus there
are no laboratory-milled feldspathic CAD-CAM prostheses.

Additive Manufacturing—3-D Printing
Additive manufacturing (AM) or 3-D printing includes processes in which material is incrementally joined or solidified under
computer control to create an object. The object is formed layer
by layer, such as fusing of particles or curing of light-sensitive

A

B

C

D

E

F

• Figure 15-1 Computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD-CAM) processing of an
onlay. A, Tooth preparation. B, Intraoral scan of the preparation. C, Occlusal relation adjustment step.
D, Virtual restoration editing step. E, Final milling preview. F, Postoperative photo.

CHAPTER 15

Digital Technology in Dentistry

329

polymers. A key advantage of 3-D printing is the ability to produce very complex geometries of restorations designed from intraoral impressions.
Desktop 3-D printers use dental resins for the fabrication
of temporary prosthetics, surgical guides, orthodontic models,
retainers, and aligners. Various dental resins for printing applications may be chosen for any of the desired characteristics, such
as transparency for optical clarity, translucency for esthetics, flexibility for patient comfort, or high-impact resins that resist wear
and fracture. The most common applications are transparent
aligners and night guards. Aligners serve as alternatives to braces
and have become especially popular because of their invisibility.
This technology may also be used for printing diagnostic casts
(Figure 15-2). Oral surgery guides from 3-D printing offer the
required precision to verify proper implant positioning where
bone is present (Figure 15-3, A), adequate bone reduction for

bone recontouring (Figure 15-3, B), and precise drill positions
(Figure 15-3, C), to name a few. These guides also facilitate immediate placement and loading of implants where a provisional restoration can be printed prior to the surgery (Figures 15-4 and
15-5). A printable material with contact bactericidal activity is
also possible, which may lead to crowns, retainers, aligners, and
implants that are resilient to degradation under oral conditions,
with longer clinical lifetimes.

• Figure 15-2 Three-dimensional (3-D) printed model of diagnostic casts.

• Figure 15-4 Surgical placement of anterior implant using a three-dimensional (3-D) surgical guide. (Courtesy Dr. Luiz Gonzaga.)

(Courtesy Dr. Luiz Gonzaga.)

Current Additive Manufacturing Technologies
Currently, 3D printing includes stereolithography (SLA), fused
deposition modeling (FDM), selective laser melting (SLM), and
direct metal laser sintering (DMLS). The most commonly used
3-D printing process (46% as of 2018) is FDM, a material extrusion technique. All 3-D printing requires a CAD file for execution
of the manufacturing.

• Figure 15-3 A, Computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD-CAM) image of a positioning guide for implant placement (top), final processed three-dimensional (3-D) printed guide (bottom).
B, CAD-CAM image of bone reduction guide (top), final 3-D printed guide (bottom). C, CAD-CAM image
of drill positioning guide (top), final -D printed guide (bottom). (Courtesy Dr. Luiz Gonzaga.)

330

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

• Figure 15-5 Because of the accuracy of this technology, a provisional
restoration can be printed to fit exactly where the implant was placed and
be loaded immediately. (Courtesy Dr. Luiz Gonzaga.)

Stereolithography

For this CAM method, thin layers of a photo-curable resin are
cured to create the computer-designed geometry. Liquid resin is
photopolymerized by using small-spot-size LEDs or laser radiation to locally cure the liquid resin. As the liquid resin cures on
the surface, the platform holding the object is gradually lowered
in the pool of liquid, allowing liquid resin to flow to the area to
be cured. The resin objects shown in Figures 15-2 to 15-5 were all
made by SLA.
SLA printers achieve the most accurate results because of the
precision of the layers this type of printer creates. The thickness
of the printed layers can be controlled by adaptive slicing. If the
surface has been designed with a high curvature, for example,
thinner layers will be applied than would be the case for a lowcurvature surface. Adaptive slicing yields a better surface quality than uniform slicing, which minimizes variations in the cusp
height across the layers.
Fused Deposition Modeling

This additive technique incrementally deposits molten thermoplastic material according to a CAD file. The item is 3-D printed
by layer, and the molten material becomes a solid object as it
cools. FDM printing uses an additive-layer approach similar to
that in SLA but uses plastic filaments rather than liquid resin. The
plastic filament is fed through an extruder that melts and deposits
the material layer by layer to form the item.
A filament of thermoplastic, metal wire, or other material is
fed into an extrusion nozzle head, which heats the material and
controls the extrusion. FDM is restricted in the variation of shapes
that may be fabricated. The method is also known also as fused
filament fabrication (FFF). FDM has been modified to use pellets
directly instead of filament. This process is called fused particle fabrication (FPF) or fused granular fabrication (FGF).

Materials for Additive Manufacturing
All classes of materials discussed in Chapter 2 are currently used
to fabricate objects by AM technology, but these materials need
to be in a flowable state or powder for processing. For polymeric
objects, photocuring liquid monomers have been used with SLA,
and thermoplastic pellets or wires are used with FDM. Postcuring
of objects made of SLA is often needed. For metal objects, metal
powder form made by atomization is the most popular feedstock
that is selectively melted by laser. Even though not all ceramics
include or form a liquid phase as with resins and metals, sintering
of ceramic particles by selective laser (SLS) is possible. However,
these ceramic parts have a rough and porous surface and are suitable as tissue-engineering scaffolds. To improve the densification
of ceramic objects, a photocuring liquid filled with a high amount
of ceramic fillers is cured with SLA, and the resulting green body is
heat-treated in a furnace to burn off resin residue and densify the
desired ceramic structure.
The mechanical properties of 3-D printed parts limit the
potential of large-scale printing. Therefore an optimized pattern of
3-D printing is important to control flaw sensitivity. Also, changes
in the printing environment have an influence on the quality of
the finished products. AM is capable of fabricating parts of various sizes, from the micro- to macro-scale. However, the precision
of the printed parts is dependent on the accuracy of the method
employed and the scale of printing. For instance, micro-scale 3-D
printing poses challenges with the resolution, surface finish, and
layer bonding, which sometimes require postprocessing techniques such as sintering.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does CBCT technology differ from quantitative light-induced
fluorescence (QLF) and other optical imaging systems?

Diagnostic Systems
Cone-Beam Computed Tomography
CBCT is an imaging technology in which the radiation is divergent
and forms a cone. This imaging technology is especially useful for
implant dentistry, oral surgery, endodontics, and orthodontics. During imaging, the CBCT x-ray generator and detector rotate around
the patient’s head. From the digital file, a 3-D rendering is computed
that can be used to visualize both erupted and nonerupted teeth,
tooth root anatomy, and abnormal structures. Such information is
beyond what is possible to see in conventional 2-D radiographs.
CBCT images deliver substantially greater radiation than standard dental 2-D x-ray exams. Thus the enhanced diagnostic sensitivity leads to greater patient radiation exposure. The exposure
can be mitigated by
• choosing the scanning protocol in accordance with the minimum diagnostic requirement, or
• using a thyroid collar and leaded glasses when these do not
detract from the image quality.

Selective Laser Melting

This AM technique uses a high-power laser to melt and fuse a
variety of metal and alloy powders together. The 2-D layers are
incrementally melted and assembled to form a 3-D object. SLM is
also known as DMLS or laser powder bed fusion (LPBF). The term
DMLS is misleading in that the object is melted during production, a variation of liquid-phase sintering.

Optically Based Caries Diagnosis
Caries causes demineralization of enamel and dentin. Demineralized areas have greater porosity than the surrounding tissue, which
changes the optical properties of the mineral tissue. This change in
optical properties is used to locate caries. Quantitative light-induced

CHAPTER 15

fluorescence (QLF) is such a nondestructive diagnostic method for
the assessment of early caries lesions. Teeth fluoresce because of
the presence of minerals in the enamel and dentin. When a tooth
becomes carious, the fluorescence of the carious lesion decreases.
The fluorescence image of enamel with incipient lesions can be digitized, and then the loss of fluorescence at the lesion site can be quantified in comparison to the fluorescence of sound enamel. The QLF
image provides a measure of the extent and severity of the lesion.
Changes in fluorescence and lesion area can be followed over time
to measure lesion development before intervention. QLF has been
successfully applied to smooth surfaces and occlusal surfaces but not
interproximal lesions.
The new QLF-D BiLuminator allows ordinary white-light
images to be collected simultaneously with fluorescent images.
The images aid in direct visual assessment and highlight features
such as leaking restoration margins with secondary caries, occlusal and interproximal caries, sealant integrity, cariogenic activity
under sealants, and the presence of calculus and gingivitis. Other
recently introduced fluorescent detection systems include the
CamX Spectra Caries Detection System (Air Techniques, Melville,
NY) and the SoproLIFE Dental Caries Detection System (Acton
North America, Mount Laurel, NJ).

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does virtual reality differ from augmented reality?

Virtual and Augmented Reality
Virtual reality (VR) is a computer-generated simulation that allows
for interactive experiences and fully re-creates the environment
through simulation.
Augmented reality (AR) is considered a form of VR in which
interacting with the real world takes place through simulation.
The objects and individuals are augmented because they are computer-generated images, but they are perceived in the real world
through a camera projected onto a screen.
VR and AR systems have become increasingly common in
dental education. Their use has changed clinical training and

Digital Technology in Dentistry

331

encourages self-directed learning. These digital tools are thought
to lower the cost of clinical education while increasing the quality.

The Future
As digital dentistry evolves, the incorporation of this technology
into dental training and clinical practices will also change. Future
dental professionals must be exposed to new digital procedures in
the curriculum and teaching.

Selected Readings
Ahrberg D, Lauer HC, Ahrberg M et al: Evaluation of fit and efficiency
of CAD/CAM fabricated all-ceramic restorations based on direct and
indirect digitalization: a double-blinded, randomized clinical trial,
Clin Oral Investig 20:291, 2016. doi:10.1007/s00784-015-1504-6.
Dutã M, Amariei CI, Bogdan CM, et al: An overview of virtual and augmented reality in dental education, Oral Health Dent Manag 10:42–
48, 2011.
Haag M, Igel C, Fischer MR: Digital teaching and digital medicine: A
national initiative is needed, GMS J Med Educ, 35 Doc43, 2018.
Jung EH, Lee ES, Jung HI, et al: Development of a fluorescence-image
scoring system for assessing noncavitated occlusal caries, Photodiagn
Photodyn 21:36–42, 2018.
Ngo TD, Kashani A, Imbalzano G: Additive manufacturing (3D printing): A review of materials, methods, applications and challenges,
Compos Part B-Eng 143:172–196, 2018.
Oberoi G, Nitsch S, Edelmayer M: 3D printing-encompassing the facets
of dentistry, Front Bioeng Biotechnol 6(172):1–13, 2018.
Park S, Kim S, Lee H, et al: Comparison of fluorescence parameters
between three generations of QLF devices for detecting enamel caries
in vitro and on smooth surfaces, Photodiagn Photodyn 25:142–147,
2019.
Tofail SAM, Koumoulos EP, Bandyopadhyay A, et al: Additive manufacturing: scientific and technological challenges, market uptake and
opportunities, Mater Today 21:22–37, 2018.
van der Veen M, de Josselin de Jong E: Application of quantitative
light-induced fluorescence for assessing early caries lesions: In Faller
RV, (editor): Assessment of Oral Health Monogr Oral Sci, Basel, 2000,
Karger, vol 17, pp 144–162 .
Yue J, Zhao P, Gerasimov JY, et al: 3D-Printable antimicrobial composite
resins, Adv Funct Mater 25:6756–6767, 2015.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Web page
Henry K, Dr Bicuspid “5 things we can expect from AI in the coming
decade.” https://www.drbicuspid.com/index.aspx?sec=sup&sub=
cad&pag=dis&itemId=325936. Accessed February 24, 2020.
Publications
Ahrberg D, Lauer HC, Ahrberg M: Evaluation of fit and efficiency of
CAD/CAM fabricated all-ceramic restorations based on direct and
indirect digitalization: A double-blinded, randomized clinical trial, Clin
Oral Investig 20:291–300, 2016. doi:10.1007/s00784-015-1504-6.
Child PL, Jr: Digital dentistry: Is this the future of dentistry? Dent Econ
101:108–114, 2011 http://www.dentaleconomics.com/articles/print/
volume-101/issue-10/features/digital-dentistry-is-this-the-future-ofdentistry.html.
Dutã M, Amariei CI, Bogdan CM, et al: An Overview of Virtual
and Augmented Reality in Dental Education, Oral Health Dent
Manag 10:42–49, 2011.
Fasbinder DJ, Dennison JB, Heys DR, et al: The clinical performance of
CAD/CAM-generated composite inlays, J Am Dent Assoc 136:1714–
1723, 2005. PMID:16383055 [Pub Med-indexed for MEDLINE].
Haag M, Igel C, Fischer MR: Digital teaching and digital medicine: A
national initiative is needed, GMS J Med Educ, 2018 35. doi:10.3205/
zma001189 Doc43.
Hickel R, Manhart J: Longevity of restorations in posterior teeth and
reasons for failure, J Adhes Dent 3:45–64, 2001. PMID: 11317384
[Pub Med-indexed for MEDLINE].
Jarad FD, Russell MD, Moss BW: The use of digital imaging for colour
matching and communication in restorative dentistry, Bri Dent J
199:43–49, 2005. doi:10.1038/sj.bdj.4812559.
Jung EH, Lee ES, Jung HI, et al: Development of a fluorescence-image
scoring system for assessing noncavitated occlusal caries, Photodiagn
Photodyn 21:36–42, 2018.
Li G: Patient radiation dose and protection from cone-beam computed tomography, Imaging Sci Dent 43:63–69, 2013. doi:10.5624/
isd.2013.43.2.63.
Mehl A, Kunzelmann KH, Folwaczny M, et al: Stabilization effects of
CAD/CAM ceramic restorations in extended MOD cavities, J Adhes
Dent 6:239–245, 2004. PMID:15536855 [Pub Med-indexed for
MEDLINE].

Ngo TD, Kashani A, Imbalzano G, et al: Additive manufacturing (3D
printing): A review of materials, methods, applications and challenges, Compos Part B-Eng 143:172–196, 2018.
Oberoi G, Nitsch S, Edelmayer M, et al: 3D printing-encompassing
the facets of dentistry, Front Bioeng Biotechnol 6(172):1–13, 2018.
doi:10.3389/fbioe.2018.00172.
Otto T, De Nisco S: Computer-aided direct ceramic restorations: A
10-year prospective clinical study of Cerec CAD/CAM inlays and
onlays, Int J Prosthodont 15:122–128, 2002. PMID: 11951800 [Pub
Med-indexed for MEDLINE].
Park S, Kim S, Lee H, et al: Comparison of fluorescence parameters
between three generations of QLF devices for detecting enamel caries
in vitro and on smooth surfaces, Photodiagn Photodyn 25:142–147,
2019. doi:10.1016/j.pdpdt.2018.11.019.
Reich SM, Wichmann M, Rinne H, et al: Clinical performance of large,
all-ceramic CAD/CAM-generated restorations after three years: a
pilot study, J Am Dent Assoc 135:605–612, 2004. PMID:15202752
[Pub Med-indexed for MEDLINE].
Sjogren G, Molin M, van Dijken JW: A 10-year prospective evaluation of CAD/CAM-manufactured (Cerec) ceramic inlays cemented
with a chemically cured or dual-cured resin composite, Int J Prosthodont 17:241–246, 2004. PMID: 15119879 [Pub Med-indexed for
MEDLINE].
Sturdevant JR, Bayne SC, Heymann HO: Margin gap size of ceramic
inlays using second-generation CAD/CAM equipment, J Esthet Dent
11:206–214, 1999. PMID: 10825877 [Pub Med-indexed for MEDLINE].
Syrek A, Reich G, Ranftl D, et al: Clinical evaluation of all-ceramic
crowns fabricated from intraoral digital impressions based on the
principle of active wavefront sampling, J Dent 38:553–559, 2010.
doi:10.1016/j.jdent.2010.03.015.
Tofail SAM, Koumoulos EP, Bandyopadhyay A, et al: Additive manufacturing: scientific and technological challenges, market uptake and
opportunities, Mater Today 21:22–37, 2018. doi:10.1016/j.mattod
.2017.07.001.
van der Veen M, de Josselin de Jong E: Application of quantitative
light-induced fluorescence for assessing early caries lesions: In Faller
RV, (editor): Assessment of Oral Health Monogr Oral Sci, Basel, 2000,
Karger, vol 17, pp 144–162 .
Yue J, Zhao P, Gerasimov JY, et al: 3D-Printable antimicrobial composite
resins, Adv Funct Mater 25:6756–6767, 2015.

331.e1

10
16
Chapter
Go Here for Cutting,
MaterialsTitle
andto
Processes
Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

CHAPTER OUTLINE

Outline Level One
Outline Level Two
O UOutline
T L I NLevel
E Two Outline Two
Outline Level 3
Benefits of Finishing and Polishing Restorative Materials
Outline Level 3
Mechanics of Abrasive Procedures

Outline Level One Level One
Outline Level Two Outline Two
Outline Level Two
Outline Level 3
Dentifrices
Outline Level 3
Summary and Recommendations

Abrasive Processes in Dentistry

Acknowledgment

K
E Y T EInstruments
RMS
Abrasive
key term this the is defininition of the key term that precedes this
Finishing and Polishing Procedures
the is defininition of the key term that precedes
key this the is defininition of the key term
key term this the is defininition of the key term that precedes this
K Ethe
Y isTdefininition
E R M S of the key term that precedes
Abrasive
A product that
haskey
a hard
phase
as an essential
constitukey
term defininition
of the
term
that precedes
this the
is
ent that provides
individual
particles with sharp cutting
defininition
of themany
key term
that precedes
edges.
Air-particle abrasion The process of material removal by way of
air-pressure–propelled abrasive particles. Typical applications
are surface cleaning, cavity preparation, and surface preparation
for bonding. The process is also known as erosion in the field of
tribology.
Bonded abrasive An abrasive instrument containing a phase that
holds abrasive particles in a more or less tight grip with spaces
in between that allow air or liquids to pass. The strength of
bonding in a product varies based on its intended use. Strong
bonding is required for work on hard materials. Breaking away
of grains from the bond of an abrasive is desirable as they
become dull. Bond materials include organic (resin or rubber),
vitrified (glass or glass-ceramic), and metal.
Buffing Polishing with a soft absorbent material such as cloth or
leather, typically in combination with a medium containing very
fine abrasive particles.
Bulk reduction and contouring An early process that precedes
finishing and polishing, whereby excess restorative material is
removed to develop the anatomical form of the final restoration.
Cutting Reduction of a material by use of an edged instrument,
such as a bladed dental bur, or a bonded abrasive disk or wheel;
implies material removal by a slicing action.
Dressing The use of a variety of tools to remove any debris that
may be clogging the spaces between abrasive particles on

term a short definition to follow
key term this the is defininition of the key term that precedes this
the is defininition of the key term that precedes
key this the is defininition of the key term
key term this the is defininition of the key term that precedes this
a bonded
abrasiveofinstrument
to expose
fresh abrasive and
the
is defininition
the key term
that precedes
restore grinding efficiency. Diamond-coated tools or bonded
abrasive stones of aluminum oxide or silicon carbide are the
most common devices used for dressing grinding wheels.
Erosion A process of material removal achieved by (1) air-pressure–propelled abrasives (air-particle abrasion), (2) pressurized liquid-abrasive mixtures (slurry erosion), or (3) chemical
dissolution using strong acids or alkali (chemical erosion or acid
etching).
Finishing The process of removing surface defects or scratches
created during the contouring process through the use of cutting or grinding instruments or both.
Grinding A machining process that uses coated or bonded abrasive wheels or points to turn against the surface of a material
workpiece in order to reduce the surface. Ground surfaces typically display linear scratch marks where abrasive particles have
ground material away.
Polish, polishing A process that uses very fine abrasives to
bring a material surface to a highly developed, finished, or
refined state. A minimal amount of material is removed from
the workpiece to generate a smooth, glossy appearance. The
force per unit area for polishing is the lightest of all processes
that use abrasives.
True/truing A process of correcting the concentricity and shape
of a grinding wheel; truing keeps the grinding wheel rotating
concentrically with the spindle axis of the motor or handpiece
head without vibration or wobble.

As has been stated many times throughout this book, the intraoral
surfaces of virtually every direct and indirect restoration must be contoured by various abrasive procedures. The goal of these procedures is
to efficiently produce the desired surface contours, contacts, textures,
and gloss on a restoration. These procedures involve removing varying

volumes of material from the surface by a process called wear. More
specifically, they employ abrasive materials and instruments to produce
abrasive wear. This form of abrasive wear is intentional as opposed to
the unintentional type of abrasive wear of composites (Chapter 5,
Wear) and ceramics (Chapter 10, Abrasiveness to Enamel).

332

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

Abrasive processes have been used since prehistoric times.
Over 10,000 years ago, hunting and gathering instruments such
as spear points, arrowheads, scraper tools, and hoes were formed
from hard, rock-like natural materials using primitive forms of
abrasion, chipping, grinding, and honing. Sandstone was used to
produce smoother surfaces on the Egyptian pyramids. Grinding
wheels of a primitive type were created over 4000 years ago by taking a cylindrical stone with an abrasive surface and spinning the
stone against metals and ceramics to adjust their shapes, reduce
rough areas, and produce smoother surfaces. These processes
were refined over subsequent millennia to produce metal daggers,
swords, spears, and shields of relatively high quality. The Chinese
introduced coated abrasives in the 13th century by embedding
seashell fragments in natural gums that were spread on a parchment backing. The invention transformed loose abrasive particles
into practical instruments.
In the early 1900s, abrasive technology advanced further
through the development and use of alumina grains, diamond
particles, and silicon carbide grit. New products in the form of
powders, slurries, particle-embedded discs and wheels, and burs
of different types emerged for use in dentistry. The further refinement of dental handpieces, air-abrasive technology, and methods
of bonding abrasives to various binders led to major processing
breakthroughs that have rapidly advanced the quality of treatment in the current era of restorative dentistry, particularly with
adhesive and esthetic dentistry. Figure 16-1 illustrates the series
of abrasive procedures and instruments used to bring a rough
removable dental prosthesis casting to the final polished state of
the prosthesis. The procedures depicted are sandblasting, cutting,
grinding, finishing, and polishing.
The focus of this chapter is to provide the reader with an awareness and broader background of the principles and mechanisms of

333

tools available to produce optimal surface finish and integrity in
dental restorations.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the benefits of finishing and polishing the surfaces of restorative
materials? What are the goals of finishing and polishing?

Benefits of Finishing and Polishing
Restorative Materials
Before any dental restoration or appliance is placed permanently
in the mouth, it should be polished to a smooth surface. Not
only is a rough surface on a restoration, prosthesis, orthodontic
appliance, and so forth uncomfortable for the patient, but it can
also cause food and other debris to cling to the surface. Such a
restoration or appliance becomes unsanitary and, in some cases,
tarnished or corroded.
Finished and polished restorations provide four benefits in
dental care: patient comfort, better gingival health, chewing
efficiency, and esthetics. One study showed that patients could
distinguish a difference in roughness from between 0.25 and
0.50 μm by tongue proprioception. The value is much lower than
20 μm as previously reported. Further, surface roughness greater
than 1 μm can lead to increased bacterial adhesion and unsightly
surface staining. Smooth surfaces resist the accumulation of food
debris and permit food to glide freely over occlusal and embrasure surfaces during mastication. Smoother restoration surfaces
help patients maintain oral hygiene by facilitating preventive oral
home care because dental floss and toothbrush bristles gain better
access to all surfaces and marginal areas. Tarnish and corrosion

• Figure 16-1 Abrasive types used to finish hard metal restorations with complex forms such as Co-Cr
alloy partial denture frameworks. A, The partial denture framework casting is sandblasted (air-particle
abraded) to remove residual casting investment. B, A silicon carbide disc is used on a dental lathe to cut
the casting sprues. C, Mounted corundum stones are used to grind excess metal left from cutting. D, A
series of rubber bonded abrasives containing progressively smaller silicon carbide grits is used to provide
a fine finish to the framework. E, Using felts with bar-type abrasives applied to bring the external finish of
the framework to a final high-luster polish. (Courtesy Bego USA.)

334

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

activity can be significantly reduced on some metallic restorations
if their entire surface area is polished (Chapter 3, Concentration
Cell Corrosion).
Rough restoration surfaces, especially those of ceramic-based
materials, can abrade and wear opposing dentition and restorations, resulting in the loss of functional and stabilizing contacts
between teeth or a reduction in the vertical dimension of occlusion. Rough contact areas on brittle materials can be stress concentration points, leading to chipping and fracture of the restoration.
Finishing and polishing of these surfaces will remove surface flaws
and improve the restoration’s resistance to fracture, especially in
areas that are under tension, such as the perimeter of layered allceramic crowns where unsupported areas of veneering ceramic are
present.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can the amount of lubricant either increase or decrease cutting
efficiency?

Mechanics of Abrasive Procedures
Mechanical abrasion, as described in this section, is a more controlled form of the abrasive wear discussed in Chapter 4, Wear. In
dentistry, the abrading instrument is referred to as the abrasive,
and the restorative material that has been abraded is called the substrate or workpiece. In this section, we will discuss two mechanisms
of abrasive wear used in dentistry: abrasion and erosion. We will
also discuss the proper motion of abrasive instruments.

Abrasion
Abrasive wear occurs where a rough, hard object, or a soft surface
containing hard particles, slides against a softer surface, digs into
the surface, and plows a series of grooves. The material removed
during the formation of the grooves, normally in the form of loose
particles, is called wear debris. A typical example is a diamond bur
abrading tooth structure during cavity preparation.

Abrasive wear can also arise in a somewhat different situation
when hard abrasive particles are introduced between two sliding surfaces and abrade material from one or both surfaces. The
mechanism of this form of abrasive wear seems to be that abrasive
particles adhere temporarily to, or become embedded within, one
of the sliding surfaces and plow grooves into the opposing surface.
An example is the use of nonbonded abrasives such as those in
dental prophylaxis pastes. These nonbonded abrasives are placed
in a rubber cup, which is rotated against a tooth or material surface.
The two forms of abrasive wear are (1) two-body wear (Figure
16-2, A), which involves a hard, rough surface; and (2) three-body
wear, involving loose, hard abrasive grains (Figure 16-2, B). These
two processes are not mutually exclusive. Diamond particles may
debond from a diamond bur and cause three-body wear. Likewise,
some abrasive particles in the abrasive paste can become trapped
in the surface of a rubber cup and cause two-body wear. Lubricants are often used to minimize the risk of these unintentional
shifts from two-body to three-body wear, and vice versa. Thus the
efficiency of cutting and grinding will be improved with the use
of lubricants such as water, glycerin, or silicone oil. Intraorally, a
water-soluble lubricant is preferred. Excessive amounts of lubricant may reduce the cutting efficiency by reducing the contact
between the substrate and the abrasive. Too little lubricant results
in increased heat generation and reduced cutting efficiency.

Erosion
Erosive wear is caused by hard particles impacting a substrate
surface, carried by either a stream of liquid or a stream of air,
as occurs in sandblasting a surface (Figure 16-2, C). Therefore
erosion as discussed here is technically a form of abrasive wear
that differs only in the mechanism by which the load necessary
for wear is delivered. Most dental laboratories have air-driven
grit-blasting units that employ hard-particle erosion to remove
surface material. A distinction must be made between this type
of erosion and chemical erosion. Chemical erosion removes
substrate material through the chemical-energy dissolution
effects of acids and alkalis versus the mechanical-energy effect

Substrate

Abrasive

A
Substrate
Abrasive
Substrate

B

C
• Figure 16-2 Illustrations of modes of wear involving abrasive particles. A, Two-body abrasion occurs
when abrasive particles are tightly bonded to the abrasive instrument that is removing material from the
substrate surface. B, Three-body abrasion occurs when abrasive particles are free to translate and rotate
between two surfaces. C, Hard-particle erosion (also called air-particle abrasion) is produced when abrasive particles are propelled against a substrate by air pressure.

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

of force-driven abrasive streams. Chemical erosion, more commonly called acid etching in dentistry, is not used as a method of
finishing dental materials. This type of erosion is used primarily
to prepare tooth surfaces and glass-phase ceramics to enhance
bonding or coating.

335

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the similarities and differences among the mechanisms responsible
for the cutting action of carbide burs and abrasive wheels?

Abrasive Motion

Abrasive Processes in Dentistry

The motion of abrasive instruments is classified as rotary, planar,
or reciprocal. In general, burs act in a rotary motion, flexible discs
act in a planar motion, and reciprocating handpieces convert a
cyclic motion into a reciprocal direction of motion of the abrasive
tool insert. Different abrasive grit sizes can be incorporated with
each motion. Reciprocating handpieces provide the special benefit
of accessing interproximal and subgingival areas to remove overhangs, finish subgingival margins without creating ditches, and
create embrasures.
In the case of a diamond bur abrading a tooth surface, as
illustrated in Figure 16-3, A, the diamond particles bonded to
the bur represent the abrasive, and the tooth is the substrate.
Also, note that the bur in the high-speed handpiece rotates in a
clockwise direction as observed from the head of the handpiece.
The rotational direction of a rotary abrasive instrument is an
important factor in controlling the instrument’s action on the
substrate’s surface. When a handpiece and bur are translated in
a direction opposite to the rotational direction of the bur at the
surface being abraded, a smoother grinding action is achieved
(Figure 16-3, B). However, when the handpiece and bur are
translated in the same direction as the rotational direction of
the bur at the surface, the bur tends to “run away” from the
substrate, thereby producing a less controlled grinding action
and a rougher surface. This effect is more noticeable at lower
rotational speeds.

Abrasion is a cutting action, but the topography of an abraded
surface is distinctly different from that of a cut surface. In a
high-speed tungsten carbide bur, the blades or cutting edges are
regularly arranged and allow removal of small pieces or segments
of the substrate as the bur rotates. As shown in Figure 16-4, A,
the pattern of removal of material by the tool corresponds to the
regular arrangements of the cutting blades. In contrast with cutting instruments, abrasive tools have many abrasive points that
generally are not arranged in an ordered pattern. For example, a
diamond rotary instrument may contain hundreds of sharp abrasive points that pass over the workpiece during each revolution
of the instrument (Figure 16-4, B). Each sharp point acts as an
individual blade and removes a chip or shaving from the material.
Because these many cutting edges are randomly arranged, innumerable scratches are produced on the surface (Figure 16-4, C).
Bulk reduction can be achieved through the use of instruments such as diamond burs, tungsten carbide burs, steel burs,
abrasive wheels, and separating discs. Whereas the action of diamond burs and abrasive wheels is often described as grinding, the
action of hard blades of steel and carbide burs is described as cutting. Figure 16-5 illustrates two sizes of carbide burs and diamond
burs of three grit sizes. Different types of instruments have unique
effects on surfaces. A 16-fluted carbide bur produces a smoother
finish than an 8-fluted carbide bur, but the latter removes material more rapidly. Similarly, the coarsest diamond bur removes

FO
FB

A

B
• Figure 16-3 The mechanics of high-speed rotary instrumentation. A, The blue circular arrow indicates
that the high-speed diamond bur rotates in a clockwise direction when viewed from the head of the handpiece. The green arrows indicate the direction that the instrument should be drawn. B, Incisal view of the
forces generated during high-speed rotary tooth preparation. As the bur rotates in a clockwise direction,
it generates a rotational force at the tooth surface, FB (large blue arrow that represents the reaction force
of tooth structure against the rotational force from the bur). The operator of the instrument must generate
an opposing force, FO (green arrow), which should exceed the reaction force to the bur, FB, and carry the
instrument against the tooth surface where the surface will be abraded.

336

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

A

B

C

• Figure 16-4 Bulk reduction of tooth surface. A, Tooth cut by a carbide bur. Note the pattern of removal
of tooth structure, which corresponds to the arrangement of blades on the bur. B, Magnified image of the
bonded diamond particles on a coarse diamond bur (×150). C, Tooth ground by a diamond bur. Note the
multiple scratches formed by the random arrangement of abrasive particles on the diamond bur.

A

B

C

D

• Figure 16-5 Instruments for surface reduction. A, 16-fluted (left) and 8-fluted (right) tungsten carbide
finishing burs. B, Fine diamond bur. C, Medium-grit diamond bur. D, Coarse-grit diamond bur.

material more quickly but leaves a rougher surface. The scanning
electron microscope (SEM) images shown in Figure 16-6 are the
surfaces of a resin-based composite produced by five instruments:
a coarse diamond, a 12-fluted carbide bur, a 16-fluted carbide bur,
an abrasive-coated finishing disc, and an abrasive-coated polishing
disc. The first three images represent surfaces of bulk reduction,
and the last two represent surfaces of fine finishing.
Rough nodules on a denture base can be removed with an abrasive, such as sandpaper, an emery arbor, or a grinding wheel. In each
case, the edges formed by the abrasive particles can remove the rough
spots as they move over the surface. Abrasives are available in varying
particle sizes. Coarse abrasives leave deep scratches in the surface,
which must be removed with finer abrasives. Finally, an abrasive can
be so fine that this results in a surface so smooth that the surface
reflects light, and the surface is said to be polished.

According to Figure 16-1, after sandblasting, an indirect prosthesis will go through a sequence of four abrasive procedures—
cutting, grinding, finishing, and polishing—depending on the
type of instruments used, the quantity of material removed from
the workpiece, and the purpose. Direct restorations normally do
not require cutting. We also use the term contour to refer to an
abrasive procedure. Dental contouring is a process of removing
small amounts of tooth enamel to change the shape, length, or
surface of the tooth to improve esthetic appearance or gingival
health. The term has evolved to comprise all procedures needed
to shape the restoration before finishing and polishing. All four
procedures perform abrasive wear, and there are only subtle differences among them. The purpose of the following discussion is not
to make a distinction among the four procedures but to present
these subtle differences.

CHAPTER 16

A

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

B

D

337

C

E

• Figure 16-6 Images of the surface of a resin-based composite after the grinding, finishing, and polishing processes using five instruments: A, A coarse diamond. B, A 12-flute carbide bur. C, A 16-flute carbide
bur. D, An abrasive-impregnated finishing disc. E, An abrasive-impregnated polishing disc.

Cutting
Cutting is generally understood as the removal of a part of a structure
by means of a shearing action, as in the removal of diseased tissue with
a bladed instrument or any other instrument in a bladelike fashion.
Substrates may be divided into separate segments, or they may sustain
deep notches and grooves by the cutting operation. Examples of cutting instruments are diamond burs, tungsten carbide burs, steel burs,
abrasive wheels, and separating discs. On the other hand, a separating
disc is an example of an instrument that can be used in a bladelike
fashion. A separating disc does not contain individual blades, but the
thin blade design allows the disc to be used in a rotating fashion to
grind through cast metal sprues and die-stone materials.

Grinding
A grinding operation is considered to be cutting but on a smaller
scale. Small particles of a substrate are removed through the action
of bladed or abrasive instruments. Grinding instruments typically
contain many randomly arranged abrasive particles. Each particle
may contain several sharp points that run along the substrate surface and remove particles of the substrate. Cutting and grinding
are both considered predominantly unidirectional in their action.
This means that a cut or ground surface exhibits cuts and scratches
oriented in one predominant direction.

Finishing
Surface imperfections can be an integral part of the substrate’s
internal structure or can be created by the instruments used for
cutting and grinding. Finishing involves removing marginal irregularities, defining anatomical contours, and smoothing away the
surface roughness of a restoration, with the aim of providing a

relatively smooth, blemish-free surface. A good example is the
removal of excess material at the junction of the tooth structure
and the restorative material to establish a smooth, uniform, and
well-adapted cavosurface margin.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does a clinician know when the smoothest surface has been achieved?

Polishing
Polishing is a special form of abrasive wear characterized by the use
of very small abrasive grains (5 μm or less) on an elastic backing.
The purpose of polishing is to provide an enamel-like luster to the
restoration. Each type of polishing abrasive acts on an extremely
thin region of the substrate surface. Polishing progresses from the
finest abrasive that can remove scratches from the previous abrasive procedure and is completed when the desired level of surface
smoothness is achieved. Polishing should be terminated when no
further change in surface luster or glossiness occurs during the
application of the finest abrasive that is used for that application.
At the end of this process, there should be no visible scratches.
However, there will always be scratches appearing at higher magnification. The instrument and the surface must be cleaned between
steps because abrasives left from the previous step will continue
making scratches. In clinical practice, the quality of the surface finish is usually judged by the surface luster without magnification.
Examples of polishing instruments are rubber abrasive points,
fine-particle discs and strips, and fine-particle polishing pastes.
Polishing pastes are applied with soft felt points, muslin (woven
cotton fabric) wheels, prophylaxis rubber cups, or buffing wheels.
Nonabrasive materials, such as felt, leather, rubber, and synthetic

338

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

foam, are popular applicator materials for retaining polishing
pastes during buffing procedures.
Polishing is considered multidirectional, which means that the
final surface scratches, albeit invisible, are oriented in many directions. Some examples of ground and polished surfaces are shown
in Figure 16-6. Note that the differences in surface appearance are
subtle because of the transitional nature of the grinding and polishing processes. If there were larger differences in the size of particles removed, the surface change would be more easily detected.
Heat generation during the abrasive procedures used for direct
restorations is a major concern. To avoid adverse effects to the
pulp, the clinician must cool the surface with a lubricant, such as
an air–water spray, and avoid continuous contact of high-speed
rotary instruments with the substrate. Intermittent contact during operation is necessary not only to cool the surface but also to
remove debris formed between the substrate and the instrument.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What precautions should be taken to minimize the generation of aerosols?
What precautions should be taken to minimize exposure to and inhalation of
aerosols?

Biological Hazards of Abrasive Procedures
Dispersions of solid particles are generated and released into the
breathing space of laboratories and dental clinics whenever abrasive procedures are performed. These airborne particles may contain tooth structure, dental materials, and microorganisms. Such
aerosols have been identified as potential sources of infectious and
chronic diseases of the eyes and lungs and present a hazard to dental
personnel and their patients. Silicosis, also called grinder’s disease,
is a major illness caused by the inhalation of silica-based aerosols.
The green-state zirconia-based computer-aided design/computeraided manufacturing (CAD-CAM) blocks for milling prostheses
are made from condensed zirconia (3Y-TZP, 4Y-TZP, etc.) particles
in the 40- to 90-nm particle-size range. The dust generated from
milling is currently classified as an eye, skin, and respiratory irritant.
The carcinogenic potential of this material has yet to be determined.
The milling generally is conducted in machines equipped with highefficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration and is considered safe for
the operator. However, technicians and dentists must de-sprue and
smooth these prostheses at the workbench prior to the sintering procedure. Therefore, following the protocol of controlling aerosolized
dust in the working place is of paramount importance.
Aerosol sources, in both the dental operatory and laboratory
environments, must be controlled whenever finishing procedures
are performed. Aerosols produced during finishing procedures may
be controlled in three ways: (1) containing at the source through
the use of adequate infection control procedures, water spray, and
high-volume suction; (2) using personal protective equipment
(PPE) such as safety glasses and disposable face masks that can
protect the eyes and respiratory tract from aerosols; and (3) installing an adequate ventilation system that efficiently removes any
residual particulates from the air. Many systems are also capable
of controlling chemical contaminants such as mercury vapor from
amalgam scrap and monomer vapor from acrylic resin.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is it sometimes inappropriate to select the hardest abrasive to reduce
the time required for finishing and polishing a prosthesis?

Abrasive Instruments
Abrasive particles should be irregular in shape so that they present
multiple sharp edges. Most abrasive grits are derived from crushing hard materials and passing particles through a series of mesh
screens (sieves) to obtain different particle-size ranges, namely,
coarse, medium-coarse, medium, fine, and superfine. Table 16-1
lists grit and particle sizes for commonly used dental abrasives.
An abrasive should be harder than the workpiece the abrasive
is supposed to abrade. If the abrasive cannot indent the surface to
be abraded, then the abrasive cannot possibly cut the surface. In
such a case, the abrasive dulls or wears. The first ranking of the
hardness of minerals was published in 1812 by Friedrich Mohs,
who ranked 10 minerals by their relative scratch. The least scratchresistant mineral, talc, received a score of 1, and the most scratchresistant mineral, diamond, received a score of 10. Despite the
lack of precision, a Mohs hardness scale kit can estimate how hard
the workpiece is to enable one to select an appropriate instrument to abrade the material with. Knoop and Vickers hardness
tests (Chapter 4, Hardness) quantify the hardness of materials.
The farther apart a substrate and an abrasive are in hardness values, the more efficient is the abrasion process. On the basis of a
comparison of hardness values for several dental materials listed in
Table 16-2, silicon carbide and diamond abrasives are expected to
abrade dental porcelain more readily compared with garnet, even
though the abrasive particles for all three materials have very sharp
edge characteristics.
The inherent strength of cutting blades or abrasive particles on
an abrasive instrument must be great enough to remove particles
of substrate material without becoming dull or fracturing too
rapidly. For example, when a grinding wheel is applied against a
metal, the abrasive particle strikes the workpiece suddenly as the
metal moves along the circumference of the wheel (Figure 16-3).
If the wheel shatters the instant the wheel contacts the work, the
blade is ineffective. On the other hand, if the wheel never fractures, the edge of the wheel may become dull, and the efficiency of
the abrasive is reduced. Ideally, the abrasive should fracture rather
than dull so that a sharp edge is always present. Fracture of the
abrasive is also helpful in shedding the debris accumulated from
the work. Although diamond burs cut almost any type of tooth
structure or restorative material, the diamond particles do not
fracture; rather, they lose substance at the tip. Furthermore, they
are likely to become clogged when ductile or soft substances are
abraded. They are most effective when used on the very hard and
brittle tooth enamel.
The main function of the abrasive is to remove material, yet
the final surface finish decides the effectiveness of the abrasives.
If too hard of an abrasive is used or if the grain size is too coarse
for use on a given material, deep scratches emerge in the substrate
that cannot be removed easily in subsequent finishing operations.
Additionally, if an abrasive does not have the proper particle shape
or does not break down in a manner that creates or exposes new
sharp-edged particles, the abrasive will tend to gouge the substrate.
A note of caution is warranted here. Subsurface grinding damage, characterized by undetectable flaws or cracks that result from
heavy-handed grinding and heat generation, can lead to early,
unexplained catastrophic failures in the newer all-ceramic restorative materials such as zirconia, lithia silicate, and lithia disilicate.
As discussed, in order for abrasive particles to remove material
from the surface of the dental restoration, they must be harder
than the restorative material. Further, the abrasives have to be held
against that material with sufficient force to allow the abrasive to

CHAPTER 16

TABLE 16-1

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

339

Abrasive Particle Sizes*
Aluminum Oxide, Silicon
Carbide, and Garnet (μm)

Grade†

Coated Disc
Diamond (μm)

120

142

Coarse

142

Supercoarse–coarse

150

122

122

Coarse–regular

180

70–86

86

Coarse–regular

240

54–63

60

Fine

320

29–32

52

Fine

400

20–23

40

Fine–superfine–coarse finishing

600

12–17

14

Superfine–medium finishing

800

9–12

8

Ultrafine–fine finishing

1200

2–5

6

Milling pastes

1500

1–2

4

Polishing pastes (2–5 μm)

2000

1

2

Polishing pastes (2–5 μm)

Grit/Mesh (USA)

Medium

Fine

Superfine

Abrasive Descriptions for Diamond
Burs and Diamond Polishing Paste

*Average particle sizes. Grades vary among manufacturers.
†

Four grades used for a popular brand of aluminum oxide–coated discs. Silicon carbide (SiC) and garnet may vary among manufacturers.

TABLE 16-2

Hardness Values of Abrasives, Tooth Structure, and Dental Materials
Mohs Hardness

Knoop Hardness (kg/mm2)

Vickers Hardness (kg/mm2)

Talc

1

–

–

Gypsum

2

–

12

Tripoli

6

–

–

Pumice

6–7

460–560

–

Porcelain

6–7

560

430

Tin oxide

6–7

–

–

Sand

7

–

–

Cuttle

7

800

–

Quartz

7

820

–

Zirconium oxide (Y-TZP)

7

–

1200–1300

Zirconium silicate

7.5

–

–

Garnet

8–9

1350

–

Emery

7–9

2000

–

Corundum

9

2000

–

Aluminum oxide

9

2100

1200

Tungsten carbide

9.8

1900

–

Silicon carbide

9–10

2500

–

Diamond

10

7000–10,000

–

Cementum

–

40

–

Dentin

3–4

70

62–70

Enamel (apatite)

5

340–431

294–408

Material
Abrasives

Tooth

Continued

340

PA RT I V

TABLE 16-2

Fabrication of Prostheses

Hardness Values of Abrasives, Tooth Structure, and Dental Materials—Cont’d
Mohs Hardness

Knoop Hardness (kg/mm2)

Vickers Hardness (kg/mm2)

Denture base resin

2–3

20

–

Calcite

3

135

–

14–24

40

Material
Restorative Materials

Metal-reinforced glass ionomer
Type III gold alloy

3

–

122–180 (soft)/155–250
(hard)

Type IV gold alloy

4

220

150–194 (soft)/248–280
(hard)

Amalgam

4–5

90

120 (Ag2Hg3 phase)

Rouge

5–6

–

–

Glass (glass–ceramics)

5–6

360

420

Composite (compomer)

–

–

52

Composite (nanohybrid)

–

–

60–62

Composite (nanofilled)

5–7

50–60

73–76

Composite (minifilled)

5–7

50–60

80

Composite (laboratory cured)

–

–

86–124

Titanium

–

–

210

Ti-6Al-4V

–

–

320

Nickel–chromium alloy (as cast)

–

153–328

200–395

Cobalt–chromium alloy (as cast)

–

–

280–380

Layered gold metal-ceramic alloy

–

–

35

Lithia-disilicate (milled)

–

–

550 (milled), 591 (sintered)

Lithia-disilicate (pressed)

–

–

601

Zirconia-reinforced lithia silicate

–

–

∼700

Zirconia oxide (Y-TZP)

–

–

1200–1300

penetrate and abrade material from the surface being worked. For
any given restorative material, choosing a sufficiently hard abrasive
that is strongly bound to the instrument supporting or carrying the
abrasive is important so that the abrasive can do the work efficiently.
In this section, we will discuss the types of abrasives used in dentistry
and how these abrasives are transformed into practical instruments.

Types of Abrasives
Many types of natural and synthetic abrasives are available
(Table 16-2), but only those commonly used in dentistry are discussed in this section. Generally, synthetic abrasives are preferred
because of their more predictable physical properties.
Aluminum Oxide. Synthetic aluminum oxide (alumina) is somewhat harder than corundum (natural alumina) because of
alumina’s purity. Several grain sizes of alumina are available
and widely used to make bonded abrasives, coated abrasives,

and air-propelled grit abrasives. Sintered aluminum oxide is
used to make white stones. Pink and ruby variations of aluminum oxide are sold in a vitreous-bonded form as noncontaminating mounted stones for the preparation of metal-ceramic
alloy surfaces to receive porcelain.
Arkansas Stone. This material contains microcrystalline quartz and
is dense, hard, and uniformly textured. Small pieces of this
mineral are attached to metal shanks and trued to various
shapes for fine grinding of tooth enamel and metal alloys.
Chalk. A white abrasive composed of calcium carbonate. Chalk is
used as a mild abrasive paste to polish tooth enamel, amalgam, and plastic materials.
Cuttle. A white calcareous powder made from the pulverized
internal shell of a Mediterranean marine mollusk. Cuttle is
available as a coated abrasive and is useful for delicate abrasion operations, such as polishing metal margins and dental
amalgam restorations.

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

Corundum. This is a white mineral form of aluminum oxide.
Corundum is most commonly used in an instrument known
as a white stone. Corundum has largely been replaced by synthetic alpha aluminum oxide in dental applications.
