Any screen.
Any time.
Anywhere.
Activate the eBook version
of this title at no additional charge.

Elsevier eBooks for Medical Education gives you the power to browse and search
content, view enhanced images, highlight and take notes—both online and offline.

Unlock your eBook today.
1. Visit studentconsult.inkling.com/redeem
2. Scratch box below to reveal your code
3. Type code into “Enter Code” box
4. Click “Redeem”
5. Log in or Sign up
6. Go to “My Library”

It’s that easy!

Place Peel Off
Sticker Here

For technical assistance:
email studentconsult.help@elsevier.com
call 1-800-401-9962 (inside the US)
call +1-314-447-8300 (outside the US)
Use of the current edition of the electronic version of this book (eBook) is subject to the terms of the nontransferable, limited license granted on
studentconsult.inkling.com. Access to the eBook is limited to the first individual who redeems the PIN, located on the inside cover of this book, at
studentconsult.inkling.com and may not be transferred to another party by resale, lending, or other means.
2020_ME

Phillips’ Science of
Dental Materials

13th
EDITION

Phillips’

SCIENCE of

DENTAL MATERIALS
Chiayi Shen, PhD
Courtesy Associate Professor
Department of Restorative Dental Sciences
College of Dentistry
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida

H. Ralph Rawls, PhD
Professor of Biomaterials
Research Division
Department of Comprehensive Dentistry
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio
San Antonio, Texas

Josephine F. Esquivel-Upshaw, DMD, MS, MS-CI, FACD
Professor
Department of Restorative Dental Sciences
College of Dentistry
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida

3251 Riverport Lane
St. Louis, Missouri 63043
PHILLIPS’ SCIENCE OF DENTAL MATERIALS, THIRTEENTH EDITION

978-0-323-69755-2

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc, All rights reserved.
Previous editions copyrighted 2013, 2003, 1996, 1991, 1982, 1973, 1967, 1960, 1954, 1946, 1940, 1936.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the Publisher. Details on how to seek permission and further information about the Publisher’s permissions
policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing
Agency can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other
than as may be noted herein).

Notices
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using
any information, methods, compounds or experiments described herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical
sciences, in particular, independent verification of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made. To the fullest
extent of the law, no responsibility is assumed by Elsevier, authors, editors or contributors for any injury and/
or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or
operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.

Library of Congress Control Number: 2021936632

Director, Content Development: Ellen Wurm-Cutter
Content Strategist: Joslyn Dumas
Senior Content Development Specialist: Kathleen Nahm
Publishing Services Manager: Shereen Jameel
Senior Project Manager: Umarani Natarajan
Designer: Bridget Hoette/Ryan Cook
Printed in India
Last digit is the print number: 9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Contributors

William A. Brantley, PhD
Professor Emeritus
Graduate Program in Dental Materials Science
Division of Restorative, Prosthetic and Primary Care Dentistry
College of Dentistry
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio
Chapter 2 Structure of Matter, General Classes of Materials, and
Principles of Adhesion
Chapter 9 Metals
Charles F. DeFreest, DDS
Dental Laboratory Director
59th Dental Laboratory
Wilford Hall Ambulatory Surgical Center
San Antonio, Texas
Chapter 16 Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding,
Finishing, and Polishing
Josephine F. Esquivel-Upshaw, DMD, MS, MS-CI, FACD
Professor
Department of Restorative Dental Sciences
College of Dentistry
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida
Chapter 10 Ceramic-Based Materials
Chapter 12 Dental Implants
Chapter 19 Clinical Research on Restorations
Saulo Geradeli, DDS, MS, PhD
Associate Professor
Department of General Dentistry
School of Dental Medicine
East Carolina University
Greenville, North Carolina
Chapter 1 Overview of Dental Materials
Lawrence Gettleman, DMD, MSD
Professor Emeritus of Biomaterials & Prosthodontics
School of Dentistry
University of Louisville
Louisville, Kentucky
Chapter 11 Prosthetic Polymers and Resins
Chapter 14 Casting Investments and Casting Procedures
Chapter 20 Emerging Technologies
Jason A. Griggs, PhD
Associate Dean for Research
Professor and Chair, Department of Biomedical Materials
Science

School of Dentistry
University of Mississippi Medical Center
Jackson, Mississippi
Chapter 18 In Vitro Research on Dental Materials
Jack E. Lemons, PhD
Professor
Department of Prosthodontics
School of Dentistry
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Birmingham, Alabama
Chapter 12 Dental Implants
Jacob G. Park, DDS
Professor of Dentistry/Clinical
School of Dentistry
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio
San Antonio, Texas
Chapter 15 Digital Technology in Dentistry
Rodney D. Phoenix, DDS, MS
Associate Dean for Dental Research
Postgraduate Dental College
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
JBSA-Fort Sam Houston
San Antonio, Texas
Chapter 11 Prosthetic Polymers and Resins
Carolyn M. Primus, PhD
Consultant
Primus Consulting
Bradenton, Florida
Chapter 7 Dental Cements
Chapter 20 Emerging Technologies
H. Ralph Rawls, PhD
Professor of Biomaterials
Research Division
Department of Comprehensive Dentistry
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio
San Antonio, Texas
Chapter 2 Structure of Matter, General Classes of Materials,
and Principles of Adhesion
Chapter 3 Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids
Chapter 5 Resin-Based Composites
Chapter 6 Bonding and Bonding Agents
Chapter 15 Digital Technology in Dentistry
Chapter 20 Emerging Technologies

v

vi

Contributors

Gottfried Schmalz, DDS, DMD, PhD, Dr.h.c
Professor
Department of Conservative Dentistry and Periodontology
University Hospital
University of Regensburg
Regensburg, Germany
Chapter 17 Biocompatibility
Chiayi Shen, PhD
Courtesy Associate Professor
Department of Restorative Dental Sciences
College of Dentistry
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida
Chapter 1 Overview of Dental Materials
Chapter 2 Structure of Matter, General Classes of Materials,
and Principles of Adhesion

Chapter 4 Mechanical Properties of Solids
Chapter 8 Dental Amalgams
Chapter 13 Auxiliary Materials
Chapter 14 Casting Investments and Casting Procedures
Kyumin Whang, PhD
Professor/Research
Department of Comprehensive Dentistry
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio
San Antonio, Texas
Chapter 5 Resin-Based Composites
Chapter 6 Bonding and Bonding Agents
Chapter 20 Emerging Technologies

Dr. Eugene W. Skinner

Dr. Ralph W. Phillips

Dr. Kenneth J. Anusavice

We would like to dedicate this edition to the first three editors of this book.
Dr. Eugene W. Skinner (I–VI), Dr. Ralph W. Phillips (V–IX), Dr. Kenneth J. Anusavice (X–XII)
Dr. Eugene Skinner, a professor of physics at Northwestern University School of Dentistry in Chicago, published the first edition
of The Science of Dental Materials in 1936. Dr. Skinner introduced Ralph Phillips as a coauthor of the 5th edition of the book
in 1960. Dr. Skinner died during the proof-page-reviewing stage of the 6th edition in 1966. He is honored with the “Eugene
W. Skinner Memorial Lecture” at Northwestern University. The lecture series was renamed “Eugene W. Skinner and Eugene P.
Lautenschlager Memorial Lecture” in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University.
Dr. Phillips renamed the book Skinner’s Science of Dental Materials in the 7th through 9th editions. After the death of
Dr. Phillips in 1991, the book has been subsequently renamed as Phillips’ Science of Dental Materials since the 10th edition.
Throughout an eminent career that spanned five decades, Dr. Ralph Phillips was recognized as one of the world’s foremost
leaders in the field of dental materials science. He was one of the first dental scientists to investigate the relationship between
laboratory tests and clinical performance. He initiated clinical investigations designed to analyze the effect of the oral
environment on restorative materials and to determine the biocompatibility of restorative materials and the efficacy of newer
material formulations and techniques of use. Over his many years of service, he remained firmly committed to his original focus
on the clinical relevance of laboratory findings, an approach that dominated both his style of teaching and his research activities.
Among his main contributions to dentistry, Dr. Phillips pioneered studies of fluoride’s influence on the solubility and hardness
of tooth enamel and its anticariogenic potential when included in restorative materials. In the 1960s, he coordinated the first
workshop on adhesive dental materials, which brought together research experts in the fields of adhesion, polymer science,
and tooth structure. During his career, he published more than 300 scientific papers and books and organized more than 40
symposia and conferences related to biomaterials and dental research.
Dr. Kenneth Anusavice is a Distinguished Professor Emeritus at the University of Florida and is one of the leading dental
materials scientists in the field. Among his many awards, the Wilmer Souder Award for Research in Dental Materials, awarded
by the International Association for Dental Research (IADR) in 1996, was one that he was most proud of. Dr. Anusavice
served as the chairman of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO)/Technical Committee (TC) 106/SC 2:
Prosthodontic Materials from 1999–2014 and was elected chairman of ISO/TC 106—Dentistry in 2014 until his retirement
in 2016. Dr. Anusavice fostered many collaborations with different dental scientists worldwide. He was on the editorial board
of numerous journals, most notably Dental Materials and Journal of Dentistry. He edited several books, contributed numerous
book chapters, and published over 180 peer-reviewed manuscripts and is recognized as the foremost authority in dental materials
and ceramic science. Perhaps his most significant contribution to dental materials science is his mentorship of countless students
and graduate students who are now respected leaders in the research field. He received the Irwin D. Mandel Distinguished
Mentoring Award, awarded by the American Association for Dental Research (AADR) in 2016, which is a true testament to his
dedication to fostering the career development of students and junior faculty in the area of research in dental materials.
vii

Front Cover

The cover image is a computer-generated fractal. Fractals are
never-ending complex patterns that are self-similar along different
scales, meaning that each portion can be considered a reducedscale image of the whole. In other words, one part of the object,
when magnified, will basically look like a fixed part of the whole
object. This fractal phenomenon is apparent in the appearance of
objects such as snowflakes and tree barks, which exist in nature.
In theory, every spatial pattern that exists in this world is a fractal. See the animation of the Mandelbrot fractal1 for self-similar
characteristics.
Fractal geometry is non-Euclidean with a dimension generally
expressed by a non-integer, that means with fractions instead of a
whole number for Euclidean geometry: such as, 1 for line, 2 for
surface and 3 for solid. For example, the fractal dimension of the
west coast of Great Britain2 is determined to be 1.25. The lower
the dimension, the straighter and smoother the coastline is. The
higher the dimension, the more tortuous and wigglier the coastline is. The ability of fractal geometry to describe simply otherwise
complex lines and surfaces has led to its application in many fields

of chemistry, physics, engineering, computer science and materials
science.
One noted example of using fractal analysis in dental materials
science is the analysis of fracture surfaces of restorations. When a
material fractures in a brittle manner, the fracture surface records
the event in such a way that many important features associated
with the stresses which caused the fracture are made clear. Rather
than stating that a surface is either rough or smooth, the fractal
dimension of the surface provides the means to assign a numerical
“grade” to the tortuosity. Experimental observations3 demonstrate
that the fracture toughness of ceramic materials is proportional to
the square root of their fractal dimension increment (D*). D* is
equal to the non-integer portion of the fractal dimension and lies
somewhere between 0 and 1.
Fractal analysis can be a powerful forensic tool for clinical evaluation of ceramic restorations4. In many cases for which the failure site has been retrieved, the researcher can distinguish between
failures caused by overload and processing errors as each mode of
failure should have distinct fractal dimensions of the materials used.

Griggs JA: Using fractal geometry to examine failed implants and prostheses.
Dent Mater 34:1748-1755, 2018.
4
Mecholsky JJ, Hsu SM, Jadaan O, Griggs J, et al: Forensic and Reliability
Analyses of Fixed Dental Prostheses. J Biomed Mat Res 01 Feb 2021, https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.b.34796.
3

Mandelbrot fractal set: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mandelbrot_set.
Mandelbrot BB: How long is the coast of Britain? - Statistical self-similarity
and fractional dimension. Science 156:636-638, 1967.

1

2

viii

Preface

The dentist and the engineer have much in common. Dentists
design restorations and prostheses that must endure in the oral
cavity. In the process, dentists make informed decisions from personal experience and existing clinical evidence to conceptualize
the optimal design of the prosthetic structure and final restoration.
Like engineers, dentists must be aware of the design principles
and possess sufficient knowledge of the physical properties of the
various types of materials they use. The goal is to exercise the best
evidence-based judgment possible in their selection of design and
materials. For example, dental professionals must know whether
the clinical situation, such as a large restoration, requires the use
of an amalgam, a resin-based composite, a cement, a casting alloy,
a ceramic, or a metal-ceramic. In addition to the mechanical
requirements of the materials that are within the training experience of an engineer, the esthetic and physiological requirements
are essential for the dentist.
The aims of this textbook are to (1) introduce the basic materials science relevant to dental applications to readers with little or
no prior engineering background, (2) describe the basic properties of dental materials that are related to clinical manipulation by
either dentists and/or dental laboratory technicians, (3) characterize the durability and esthetics of dental restorations and prostheses
made from biomedical materials, and (4) identify characteristics
of materials that affect tissue compatibility and general biological
safety. The technology and information provided are intended to
bridge the gap between the knowledge of biomaterials obtained in
basic courses in materials engineering, chemistry, and physics and
the use of the materials in the dental lab and dental clinic. The
emphasis of the book remains on the why rather than the how in
the selection and use of dental materials and how the oral environment affects materials. The manipulation parameters required for
maximum performance are stressed throughout. Nonetheless, the
reader is encouraged to understand the rationale for the selection
of a particular material or technical procedure.
The chronology of the presentation of the subjects in this edition follows the format of the 12th edition, with some modifications. For the 13th edition, one new section and three new chapters
are added, together with the merging of some chapters into one.
This edition has 20 chapters divided into five four-chapter sections
to reflect the focus of the chapters in each section. Part I, General
Classes and Properties of Dental Materials, covers the fundamental
information for the scope of dental materials and their physical/
mechanical properties relevant to the selection of materials for dental applications. Chapter 1 was revised to focus on the role of materials in clinical dentistry. The topics of metals and polymers are
merged with Chapter 2, along with a brief introduction to ceramics
and composites. Part II, Direct Restorative Materials, is focused
on four groups of materials: resin-based composites, bonding and
bonding agents, dental cements, and dental amalgams. Part III,
Indirect Restorative Materials, is focused on the use of metals, den-

tal ceramics, denture base resins, and dental implants. The major
change is merging dental casting alloy, metal joining, and wrought
metals into one chapter. Part IV, Fabrication of Prostheses, covers the materials needed and the technology of making metallic
prostheses from basic ingredients. Chapters on impression materials, gypsum products, and dental waxes are merged as Chapter 13,
Auxiliary Materials. A new chapter entitled Digital Technology in
Dentistry (Chapter 15) was added. Part V, Assessing Dental Restorations, is a new section comprising two existing chapters (Chapters 17 and 20) and two new chapters (Chapters 18 and 19). The
rationale of this section and the chapters included are discussed in
the “Organization of the Book” section of Chapter 1.
Several of the chapters represent significant changes in
approaches to the specific subject. Chapter 1, Overview of Dental Materials, has been revised to include a brief description of
tooth structure and the potential issues occurring that require
intervention. Examples of issues and recognized treatments are
discussed. The topics of the evolution of biomaterials and the
standards for safety and quality assurance are distributed among
Chapters 17, 18, and 20. After merging with the materials on
metals and polymers, Chapter 2, Structure of Matter, General
Classes of Materials, and Principles of Adhesion, is organized
in the following sequence: structure of atoms and molecules,
bonds between atoms and between molecules, crystalline versus
amorphous structure, the resultant classes of materials (metals,
ceramics, and polymers) from bonding, general properties of
each class of material, the key components of the fourth class of
material, composites, and principles of adhesion. Keep in mind
that the composites discussed here are not limited to those used
in dentistry. The chapter delineates the role of adhesion (bonding) in the formation of materials. The significance of bonding is
reinforced in Chapters 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. Finally, Chapter 20,
Emerging Technologies, describes recently emerged technologies
with the potential for dental applications and projects potential
future technologies in dentistry.
Three new chapters are added in this edition. Over the last two
decades, new digital technologies and digital equipment have been
introduced to the dental community and matured. Chapter 15,
Digital Technology in Dentistry, presents an overview of dental
imaging and computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD-CAM) technologies, such as digital impressions,
milling, and three-dimensional (3-D) printing, and the materials
currently used for each process. The use of digital technology for
making prostheses, CAD-CAM, is also addressed in Chapters 9
(Metals), 10 (Ceramic-Based Materials) and 11 (Prosthetic Polymers and Resins).
Dental materials research has become specialized in techniques
and data analyses, and the clinical relevance of in vitro research is
often questioned. Chapter 18, In Vitro Research on Dental Materials, discusses the importance of in vitro research in developing
ix

x

Preface

improved preventative, restorative, and auxiliary materials and the
limitations of in vitro research when making clinical decisions.
Computer modeling methods and statistical methods for forecasting clinical performance based on data gathered in vitro are also
discussed.
The ultimate test for a restorative material is clinical performance as a restoration, including longevity and predictability
of use. Chapter 19, Clinical Research on Restorations, discusses
clinical performance testing of dental biomaterials, which is considered the most valid test of a material's behavior in the oral
environment. The various types of clinical studies are discussed,
along with the advantages and disadvantages of each. Also, this
chapter describes existing analytical methods for assessing performance.

As with the last two editions, each chapter contains a section
of key terms with definitions that are designed to familiarize the
reader with the content of the chapter and a number of critical
thinking questions that are intended to stimulate thinking and
emphasize important concepts. The answers to these questions are
generally found in the section or sections immediately following
each question. The selected key terms listed are associated with the
content of the chapter, but the list is not intended to be a glossary
of the chapter. In this edition, the 10 most relevant references are
cited in the book, and the remaining references are stored online.
Chiayi Shen
H. Ralph Rawls
Josephine F. Esquivel-Upshaw

Acknowledgments

In a revision of this magnitude, the editors must draw upon the
expertise of colleagues and friends. Equally important, if not
more, is a book with a solid foundation that will facilitate the
process. We are blessed that Dr. Eugene W. Skinner, Dr. Ralph
W. Phillips, and Dr. Kenneth J. Anusavice built the foundation
of the book over three-quarters of a century. Many individuals
should be recognized both for their contributions to the field of
dental materials science, to earlier editions, and to the revision of
this textbook.
Novel suggestions were made on the reorganization and the
content of the 13th edition to adapt to the ever-changing needs
of the dental community. Dr. Saulo Geraldeli made significant
contributions to Chapter 1 to provide an overview of preventive
and restorative materials. Dr. William Brantley made significant
contributions to Chapter 2 on classes of materials and adhesion,
and merged all metal subjects, except amalgam, in Chapter 9. Dr.
Kyumin Whang wrote Chapter 5 and contributed to revision of
Chapter 6 on bonding agents and Chapter 20 on emerging technologies. Dr. Carolyn Primus revised Chapter 7 on cements and
made major contributions to the revision of Chapter 20. Drs. Rodney Phoenix and Larry Gettleman, both renowned prosthodontists, coauthored Chapter 11 on prosthetic polymers and resins.
Dr. Gettleman also assisted in Chapters 14 and 20. The revision
of Chapter 12 on dental implants was coauthored by Dr. Jack
Lemons, an internationally recognized expert on implant materials and designs. Chapter 15 is a new chapter on digital technology
by Dr. Ralph Rawls and Dr. Jacob Park. Dr. Charles DeFreest
made significant contributions to the revision of Chapter 16 on
finishing and polishing. Dr. Gottfried Schmalz revised Chapter 17
on biocompatibility. Dr. Jason Griggs contributed to Chapter 18
on in vitro testing on dental materials; this is new to the 13th edition and should prove valuable in elucidating laboratory tests for
materials prior to marketing. Chapter 19 on clinical research on

restorations is a new chapter by Dr. Josephine Esquivel-Upshaw.
Chapters 18 and 19 discuss the strengths and weaknesses of both
categories of research and stress the need of keeping a balance.
Much of the artwork came from the 12th edition and was created by Jeannie Robertson. Other artwork that was reprinted from
the 11th edition was created by Dr. José dos Santos, Jr.
We express our appreciation to those who contributed to
the 12th and earlier editions of this textbook but who were not
contributors to the 13th edition. Several of the revised chapters
contain portions of sections from contributors to previous editions. These contributors include Drs. Grayson Marshall Jr., Sally
Marshall, Barry Norling, Sibel Antonson, Erica Texeira, Qian
Wang, John Wataha, Jack Ferracane, Rodway Mackert Jr., KarlJohan Söderholm, Harold Stanley, and Mr. Paul Cascone. These
individuals provided significant input to the 12th and/or earlier
editions, in which several significant changes had been introduced
to enhance readability and the clinical perspectives on dental biomaterials. In their quest to promote evidence-based dentistry, they
blended basic science, clinical science, and applied or translational
research findings with processing and manipulation variables to
optimize production and clinical outcomes.
We would also like to acknowledge the immense contribution
of Dr. Kenneth Anusavice to the 10th through 12th editions of
this book. He is a true inspiration for all dental materials scientists
because he bridged the gap between laboratory and clinical applications. We also thank his wife, Dr. Sandi Anusavice, for assisting
with grammatical edits for this edition.
Finally, we would like to thank the staff at Elsevier Inc. for
their assistance in organizing and expediting the activities related
to publishing the 13th edition. These individuals include Alexandra Mortimer, Joslyn Dumas, and Kathleen Nahm during the
planning and writing phase, and Umarani Natarajan and Radhika
Sivalingam in the editing and production phase.

xi

Contents

11
12

Part I General Classes and Properties of
Dental Materials
1
2
3
4

Overview of Dental Materials
Structure of Matter, General Classes of
Material and Principles of Adhesion
Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids
Mechanical Properties of Solids

3

Part IV Fabrication of Prostheses

15
49
64

13
14

Part II Direct Restorative Materials
5
6
7
8

Resin-Based Composites
Bonding and Bonding Agents
Dental Cements
Dental Amalgams

87
115
128
153

Part III Indirect Restorative Materials
9
10

Metals
Ceramic-Based Materials

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins
Dental Implants

171
202

15
16

Auxiliary Materials
Casting Investments and Casting
Procedures
Digital Technology in Dentistry
Materials and Processes for Cutting,
Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

233
253

275
306
326
332

Part V Assessing Dental Restorations
17
18
19
20

Biocompatibility
In Vitro Research on Dental Materials
Clinical Research on Restorations
Emerging Technologies

Index

355
381
390
401
413

xiii

Phillips’ Science of
Dental Materials

Part I

General Classes and Properties
of Dental Materials
1 Overview of Dental Materials, 3
2 Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles
of Adhesion, 15
3 Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids, 49
4 Mechanical Properties of Solids, 64

1

1

Overview of Dental Materials
OUTLINE
The Oral Cavity

Challenges of Dental Materials in the Oral Cavity

Structure of Teeth

The Future Need for Dental Biomaterials

Potential Issues and Treatments Associated With Teeth

Organization of the Book

Categories of Dental Materials

KEY TERMS
Auxiliary dental material Substance used in the construction
of a dental prosthesis that does not become a part of the
prosthesis.
Preventive dental material Cement, coating, or restorative material that either seals pits and fissures or releases a therapeutic
agent, such as fluoride and/or mineralizing ions, to prevent or
arrest the demineralization of the tooth structure.
Restorative dental material Metallic, ceramic, metal-ceramic, or
resin-based substance used to replace, repair, or rebuild teeth

and/or enhance esthetics. A direct restorative material is placed
in the tooth preparation and is transformed to be a restoration. An indirect restorative material is fabricated extraorally to
produce prostheses.
Temporary restorative material Cement or resin-based composite used for a period ranging from a few days to several
months to temporarily restore or replace missing teeth or tooth
structure until a definitive, lasting prosthesis or restoration can
be placed.

Dentists and engineers have similar long-range objectives in their
professions—that is, to design, construct, apply, and evaluate devices
or structures of materials that can be subjected to a wide range of
environmental conditions. They must have a thorough knowledge
of the properties and behavioral characteristics of the materials they
intend to use. However, dentists need to make proper diagnoses,
prevent dental caries, and surgically treat the affected tooth structures. Subsequently, they must select a material, or materials, for
either direct or indirect applications aiming to restore the patient’s
intraoral functions. The science of dental materials covers a broad
range of terminology, composition, microstructure, and properties
used to describe or predict the performance of materials developed
for dental applications. Previous courses in mathematics, chemistry,
and physics should have prepared you to read this book and understand the terms and principles involved in describing the behavior
of these materials as they are used clinically and in the testing laboratories of academia, governmental facilities, and industry.
Properties of materials can be categorized into chemical and
physical properties. Chemical properties are generally composed of
the composition and behavior of materials in a chemical environment, regardless of any interaction with other external influences.
These properties will be presented in chapters where specific materials are discussed. Physical properties (Chapter 3, Introduction) are
measurable variables that describe how an object looks, feels, or acts
when the object is probed by external agents, such as heat, light,
moisture, or force. Mechanical properties are an aspect of physical
properties, primarily related to the behavior of materials in response

to externally applied forces or pressures (Chapter 4, What Are
Mechanical Properties?). In a clinical environment, the behavior of
dental materials may depend on several variables simultaneously,
but our ability to differentiate primary from secondary factors or
properties will allow us to easily understand or predict a material’s
performance. Furthermore, this potential to predict clinical performance will allow us to analyze the causes of structural degradation and failure of these materials when they no longer serve their
intended functions in the oral cavity.
In this chapter, we will describe the function of the oral cavity,
the structure of the tooth, potential issues involving teeth that
require intervention, categories of materials by application, challenges to these materials in restoring the function of the teeth,
safety issues of dental materials, the future need for dental biomaterials, and the organization of the book.

The Oral Cavity
As an anatomical space and part of the head and neck, the oral
cavity consists of the lips, cheeks, minor salivary glands, gingiva,
tongue, hard palate, and teeth. As part of human evolution, the
oral cavity developed to allow humans to ingest food, chew, swallow, breathe, and speak.
In addition, the oral cavity is a food processor for the body.
The presence and colonization of bacteria, along with distinct teeth
anatomy, saliva, and chewing (motion), begin the breakdown of
food and initiate the digestive process. Therefore humans are able
3

4

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

to obtain the nutrients necessary for survival. Furthermore, both
biting and chewing require upper and lower jaws, muscles, and
teeth working in unity to achieve this goal. A distinctive component
required in this interaction (Figure 1-1, A) to cut and grind food
is force. You will find throughout this book that the term force is
often used, so a proper presentation of the term is warranted.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How is force generated, and how do we measure the quantity of force?

What Is Force?
In classical physics, force is defined as the interaction between two
objects during the action of push or pull. When opposing teeth
come into contact during occlusion, an interaction occurs, and
forces act upon the teeth in contact. Thus one can say that force
exists as the result of an interaction, or when two objects contact
one another. According to Newton’s third law of motion, for every
action, there is an equal and opposite reaction, or in other words,
for every interaction, there is a pair of forces going in opposite
directions coming from both objects (Figure 1-1, B). When this
interaction ceases, or when teeth do not occlude, the two objects
no longer experience force. However, not all interaction requires
physical contact. For example, objects fall to the ground because
the earth’s gravity constantly pulls objects toward the earth.
Force is a vector that has direction and magnitude. The quantity of force is measured using a unit known as Newton, abbreviated with an “N.” One Newton is the amount of force required
to give a 1-kg mass an acceleration of 1 m/s2, which means that
1 N = 1 kg · m/s2. Acceleration makes a stationary object come
into movement. We know that the Earth’s gravitational acceleration is about 9.8 m/s2. Therefore gravity exerts a force of 9.8 N
on an object with a mass of 1 kg. If this object is resting on a
tabletop, a force of 9.8 N will be exerted on the area of contact. Furthermore, if we assume this area of contact is 100 mm2
(= 1 × 10–4 m2), and we divide the applied force by the area, we
obtain a value of 0.098 N/mm2 (= 9.8 × 104 N/m2) for the force,
known as pressure, on the surface. The International System (SI)
unit of pressure is N/m2, which is also called Pascal (Pa). The force
applied by the weight of the object is distributed throughout the
supporting substrate as internal stress and can cause a strain, or
deformation of the substrate. Stress is calculated by dividing the
force by the cross-sectional area of the substrate and has the same

SI unit as pressure. The concept of stress and strain will be discussed in Chapter 4, Stress and Strain.

Mastication and Clenching Forces
The range of biting forces varies markedly from one area of the
mouth to another and from one individual to another. The most
quoted maximum bite forces range from 400 to 890 N for molar
teeth, 222 to 445 N for premolars, 133 to 334 N for canines, and
89 to 111 N for incisors. Although there is considerable overlap,
biting force generally is greater for males compared with females
and for young adults compared with children.
A 2002 study reported a mean clenching force of 462 N, with a
range of 98 to 1031 N for individuals between the ages of 28 and
76 (mean age = 46) who had lost their posterior teeth. In comparison, subjects with a complete dentition exerted a mean clenching
force of 720 N with a range of 244 to 1243 N. If a force of 756 N is
applied to a cusp tip over an area equivalent to 3.9 mm2, the compressive stress would be 193 MPa (1 MPa = 1 × 106 Pa). If the area
is smaller, then the stress within the cusp would be proportionately greater. The Guinness Book of Records (1994) lists the highest
human bite force as 4337 N sustained for 2 s. The average maximum sustainable bite force is approximately 756 N.
Taking this information into consideration, one may ask what
attributes or characteristics allow the tooth to sustain such force.
Let us pause and familiarize ourselves with the structures of the
tooth.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the structure of the tooth enable resistance to fracture from
occlusal loading?

Structure of Teeth
In the oral cavity, teeth are firmly joined to the upper and lower
jaws by tooth-supporting connective tissues (cementum, periodontal ligament). This assembly of tissues ensures enough
flexibility to withstand the forces of mastication and act as thermal
and chemical insulators. Teeth perform important functions in
the oral cavity. The front teeth can grab and cut food to a size that
is suitable for the mouth (bite-size). They also have a role in speech
and contribute to facial aesthetics. The posterior teeth’s morphology is designed to grind the bite-size food into smaller sizes, which
facilitates food passage from the throat to the stomach.
At the teeth’s full formation and physiological capacity, they
will have the following structures: enamel, dentin, enamel-dentin
junction, pulp, and cementum (Figure 1-2).

Enamel

A

B

• Figure 1-1 Interaction between teeth. A, Natural human dentition of
an adult patient showing upper and lower teeth in full-occlusion contact.
B, Forces acting on teeth at occlusion.

Dental enamel is a biologically ceramic composite made of precisely arranged 20-nm-diameter fibrous apatite crystals (92 to 94
vol%). The meaning of composite will be discussed in Chapter 2,
Composite Materials. The remaining nonmineral content (2 to
4 wt%) is represented by water, lipids, and several peptides. This
small amount of nonmineral components, along with its hierarchical anisotropic structure, regulates the mechanical properties of
enamel to respond to the tooth’s functional needs, such as strength
and resistance to wear upon loading. On a micrometer scale, enamel
contains rod and interrod structures (Figure 1-3), beginning at the
enamel-dentin junction and extending to the tooth surface. The

CHAPTER 1

ability of the rigid rod structure, along with the organic interrod
component, to weaken the stress concentration at the crack tip, if
present, improves the resistance of the enamel to fracture from the
stress generated at the surface contact.

Dentin
Dentin is a composite mineralized tissue that contains less mineral than enamel and is composed of nanocrystalline carbonated
hydroxyapatite (Figure 1-4). The organic content (30 vol%)
is almost exclusively type I collagen fibrils plus noncollagen
proteins, such as proteoglycans. In addition, this tissue has a
peculiar morphological feature: the presence of tubules extending
from the enamel-dentin junction to the pulp. These tubules have

Enamel
Dentin-enamel
junction
Gingiva

Pulp
chamber

Dentin

Cementum

Periodontal
ligament

Alveolar
bone

Spongy
bone

Cortical
bone

• Figure 1-2 Schematic cross-sectional view of a natural anterior tooth
and supporting tissues.

Overview of Dental Materials

diameters varying from 2.5 μm near the pulp tissue to 0.8 μm at
the enamel-dentin junction. They also run transverse to the root
or in an S-shape in the crown. This anisotropic, hierarchically oriented, and less mineralized microstructure serves as a foundation,
shapes the roots, and protects the pulp. When loaded intraorally
and force is applied parallel to the tubules, dentin responds better
mechanically than when loads are applied perpendicularly.

Dentin-Enamel Junction
Between the harder, brittle enamel and the softer, durable (tough)
dentin, a functionally graded junction, the dentin-enamel junction (DEJ), is present, allowing a smooth transition of loads from
the enamel to the dentin (Figure 1-5). This interface inhibits the
propagation of cracks from the enamel to the dentin, thus supporting the tooth’s integrity during masticatory actions. Even
though fracture lines between enamel and dentin appear as a result
of continuous masticatory action and/or occasional impact loading, enamel infrequently debonds from dentin, making the DEJ
highly resistant to damage.

Cementum
Cementum is a mineralized tissue covering the entire root surface of
the tooth. Cementum is composed of water, organic matrix, and mineral. About 50% of the dry mass is inorganic and consists of hydroxyapatite crystals. The remaining organic matrix is largely made up of
collagen and, to a lesser degree, glycoproteins and proteoglycans.
The main function of cementum is to support or anchor the tooth,
together with the principal periodontal fibers and alveolar bone.

Pulp
The dental pulp is centrally located in the pulp cavity and quite
often resembles the external surface of the tooth. This specialized,
loose, fibrous connective tissue is composed of collagen fibrils
and organic ground substance composed of 75% water and 25%
organic material. As an organ, the pulp fulfills key physiological
functions, namely, formative or developmental (generates dentin),
nutritive (supplies nutrients and moisture through the vascular
system), protective (responds to injury and noxious stimuli), and

C
C
C
R

A

5

C

B

• Figure 1-3 Transmission electron microscope images of sound enamel. A, High-resolution image of
enamel depicting the structural organization between rods (R) and interrods (C) (×3K). B, Ultrahigh-resolution image showing the distribution of crystal in one rod (white star). The semiwhite spaces between
crystals are porosities (×200K).

6

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

A

B

• Figure 1-4 Scanning electron microscopy images of fractured sound dentin specimens. A, Massive
presence of open tubules (×400). B, Higher magnification of a longitudinal fracture allowing the visualization of intertubular dentin (PD), peritubular dentin (white index), and the organic structure lying free within
the dentinal tubule know as lamina limitans (white arrow) (×4000).

• Figure 1-5 Scanning electron microscopy image of the dentin-enamel
junction region of sound human tooth showing dentin (D), enamel (E), and
dentinal tubule (T). The pointers depict the smooth transition between
the enamel and dentin. Because of the structural difference between the
enamel and the dentin, cohesive separation at the interphase, indicated by
Δ, is an artifact from sample preparation.

sensory (nerve fiber network transmits afferent pain). Whenever
possible, especially while using dental materials, preserving the
health of such vital tissue is highly desired.

Potential Issues and Treatments Associated
With Teeth
Taking into consideration the lifespan and lifestyle of humans, there
are three categories of issues that may affect and change the normal
appearance, structure, position, and function of teeth to undesirable
outcomes that require intervention to restore their function. These
categories are biological, genetic, and mechanical in nature.

Biological Issue
The oral cavity is an open ecosystem with the most diverse microbial
communities in the body and is constantly under threat. The oral
cavity is also where digestion of food begins (solid and liquid) and
the apparatus that humans use to communicate. In this environment,
the inevitable interaction between bacteria, saliva, oral hygiene, and
diet can lead to health or disease. If such interaction favors a balance

among these factors, then oral health is promoted. On the other
hand, if an imbalance takes place (i.e., poor oral hygiene and highsugar diet), carious lesions will develop, leading to superficial (S),
moderate (M), and deep (D) active lesions (Figure 1-6).
Superficial active carious lesions are usually located at the
enamel level only and appear chalky (Figure 1-6, A). If these
lesions are located on smooth buccal or lingual surfaces, they are
known as white spot lesions (WSLs). WSLs can be treated by application of either highly fluoridated materials or through the infiltration of polymerizable, unfilled, low-viscosity adhesive resins. If
the superficial lesions are present in grooves, pit and fissure sealants are used. Clinically, placing sealants in noncarious grooves is
recommended for pediatric and adolescent patients at high caries
risk. All treatments discussed do not involve surgical intervention
but utilize, in part, the porosity of tooth structure caused by the
carious process for infiltration of fluoride ions or fluid polymerizable monomers for protection against further acid attack. Moderate to deep carious lesions indicate loss of tooth structures, quite
often with exposed dentin substrate (Figure 1-6, A & B). Unfortunately, these clinical occurrences require the use of sharp burs and/
or hand instruments to remove the affected tissues and reshape the
remaining tooth structures to accommodate the restorative dental biomaterial selected. The materials can be composites, ceramics, or metals, as will be discussed later. A myriad of preparation
designs (reshaping), such as cavity preparation, inlays, onlays, and
full crowns, are available. In cases of extensive carious lesions that
affect several teeth, partial or even full-mouth teeth extraction
is the only solution. To recover the patient’s ability to chew and
speak in the case of tooth loss from extraction or trauma, prosthetic appliances such as dental bridges, implants, and complete
dentures are used.

Genetic Issue
Across the world, in all countries and cultures, observing people
with misaligned or deficient bites when they smile or speak is
not uncommon. Such phenomena, termed malocclusion, can be
caused by extra teeth, lost teeth, impacted teeth, or abnormally
shaped teeth. A small underdeveloped jaw, caused by a lack of
masticatory stress during childhood, can cause tooth overcrowding (Figure 1-7, A). Crowding of the teeth can be treated with
orthodontics, often through planned tooth extractions, clear
aligners, and/or dental braces. Braces are sets of flexible metal
wires and brackets made of metal or ceramic materials. Brackets
are cemented to the teeth (Figure 1-7, B), and wires are tightened

CHAPTER 1

Overview of Dental Materials

7

M

D
S

B

A

• Figure 1-6 Active carious lesions in anterior teeth. A, Chalky appearance of demineralized enamel
represents superficial (S) carious lesion, and dark-brown exposed dentin shows deep (D) carious lesion.
B, Medium (M) carious lesion represented by the loss of enamel before exposing dentin.

A

B

C

• Figure 1-7 Genetic issue. A, Misaligned lower anterior teeth. B, Ceramic/metal-base orthodontic braces were bonded to the enamel to move teeth to proper position. C, A metal wire is attached to the lingual
enamel of the lower anterior teeth to prevent drifting of the teeth, which would compromise the planned
clinical outcome. (Courtesy Dr. Adalberto Paula Souza, Jr.)

and adjusted over time so that the elastic properties of the wire
gradually apply enough force to move the teeth into the desired
alignment. However, teeth naturally tend to drift out of place,
even after treatment with braces. As a result, wearing a retainer
made of wires and acrylic resin or wires bonded to the tooth
(Figure 1-7, C) may be needed to keep newly aligned teeth from
moving.

Mechanical issue
The interaction between opposing teeth that enables the size
reduction of food also leads to the wearing down of teeth, which
is known as attrition and is often associated with masticatory
force and parafunctional activity. Attrition mostly causes wear of
the incisal and occlusal surfaces of the teeth. Although a certain
degree of attrition is normal, unnecessary loss of tooth structure
at the cementum-enamel junction can also occur in the presence
of unbalanced stresses, friction, biocorrosion (chemical, biochemical, and electrochemical degradation), or a combination
of these. Studies have reported that the prevalence of attrition in
the population can reach as high as 75%. Clinical examples are
bruxism/clenching, caused by repetitive jaw-muscle parafunction
activity leading to occlusal excessive wear; abfraction (static stress

biocorrosion); and abrasion/biocorrosion, caused by the action of
acidic food and/or beverages, as well as toothbrushes, on the surface of the teeth (Figure 1-8). Treatment options that require the
use of dental materials include fabrication of an occlusal guard to
deprogram masticatory muscles and avoid grinding and clenching, restorations to prevent further wear and decrease sensitivity,
and “full-mouth rehabilitation” for severe cases. In cases of tooth
fracture, the extension and remaining amount of the tooth structures dictate the approach (i.e., restoration or extraction) and the
selection of the restorative dental biomaterial.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the differences among preventive, restorative, and auxiliary dental
materials used when constructing a fixed dental prosthesis (FDP)?

Categories of Dental Materials
Dental materials may be fabricated using any of the four classes of
materials: metals, ceramics, polymers, or composites discussed in
Chapter 2. From the viewpoint of intended applications, they are
classified as preventive, restorative, and auxiliary.

8

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

A

B
• Figure 1-8 Noncarious cervical carious lesions. A, Erosion (triangle). B, Biocorrosion (pointers).

A

B

• Figure 1-9 Preventive sealant. A, One sealant (dashed white arrow) that needs repair and an area of a
deep groove planned to receive sealant (pointer). B, Sealant repaired and a new one placed.

After successful treatment of the disease and removal of the infected
tissue, the obvious loss of the tooth structure needs restoration.
Depending on the amount of tooth-structure loss, the restoration
can be a filling, inlay/onlay, full crown, bridge, implant, or denture.
Restorative dental materials consist of synthetic components
that are used to repair or replace tooth structure. They are grouped
by composition, specific function, the type of tooth structure they
are replacing, or method of fabrication. This section will focus
on the method of fabrication, which is classified into direct and
indirect restorative materials. However, a temporary restoration is
often needed before the final definitive restorations are delivered,
especially for indirect restorations.

in foil form, for example, can be used to make dental restorations
(“fillings”) directly on the teeth, but this technique is rarely used
today. Amalgam alloy is a metallic powder containing silver, tin,
and copper, which generates a condensable (moldable) mixture
that allows placement and carving at the intraoral temperature
within a reasonable working time when mixed with mercury.
Once this mixture hardens, the solid exhibits enough strength
to perform duties as a tooth-replacement material (Chapter 8,
Introduction).
In a similar way, glass or ceramic particles of different sizes
(micron to nano), shapes, and compositions are incorporated into
a variety of liquid monomers to generate the so-called resin-based
composite materials. As a result, composite materials of different viscosities and compositions are formulated. Clinically, this
group of materials can be transformed from moldable to a solid
state within a short period of time when two components are
mixed or when a single component, as received, is exposed to a
high-intensity blue light (Figure 1-10). The mechanism of transformation of the former is called chemical polymerization, and
the latter is called photopolymerization, giving dental practitioners timeless control when manipulating, inserting, or sculpting
the material intraorally (Chapter 5, History of Composites). One
unique aspect that characterizes these materials is their capacity
to micromechanically adhere to the teeth and other dental material substrates via bonding mechanisms. This aspect fostered the
concept of minimally invasive dentistry. Their capacity to mimic
or reproduce tooth color is highly relevant.

Direct Restorative Materials
Direct restorative materials are a group of materials placed directly
into a designed tooth preparation that go through a phase transformation from a flowable or moldable state to a functional, solid
state while they are being adapted to the preparation. Pure gold

Indirect Restorative Materials
During their assembly, some restorations and prostheses undergo
intra- and extraoral steps before placement in the oral cavity
(Figure 1-11, A & B). These materials and techniques are meant
to replace large areas of lost tooth structure, in addition to actual

Preventive Materials
Preventive dental materials usually include polymer-based materials that seal susceptible surfaces of the tooth (i.e., pits and fissures)
against caries (Figure 1-9) and/or release fluoride or other therapeutic agents to prevent or inhibit the progression of tooth decay
(dental caries). The service life of restorative materials may be limited to a short-term application (up to several months) or moderately long time periods (1 to 4 years) when they are used to release
therapeutic agents. This is because either the materials deteriorate
as they release the therapeutic agents, or they lose their preventive
capability as the release rates fall below the therapeutic limit.

Restorative Materials

CHAPTER 1

A

Overview of Dental Materials

9

B

• Figure 1-10 Direct composite restoration. A, An active/arrested carious lesion at the lingual surface on
a lower molar tooth. B, After surgical removal of the infected carious tissues, a direct restorative material
was placed.

A

B

C

• Figure 1-11 Indirect ceramic restoration. A, Tooth preparation isolated with rubber dam. B, Indirect ceramic restoration made and adapted to a stone cast. C, Clinical view of the tooth/ceramic assembly after
finishing the adhesive luting steps. (Courtesy Dr. Karine Barizon.)

• Figure 1-13 A set of complete removable dentures. (Courtesy Dr. Maged
• Figure 1-12 A removable partial denture framework in place. The pointers indicate the retentive arms, and the arrows indicate the reciprocal
arms. The wire mesh area between teeth provide sites for retaining artificial
teeth with tissue-colored denture resin.
teeth. They are generally called indirect restorative materials and can
be fixed by cementation (Figure 1-11, C) or remain removable,
like a partial denture held by friction (Figure 1-12), or a complete
denture (Figure 1-13), which is held to soft tissue by wetting. The
issue of wetting will be discussed in Chapter 2, Wetting.
Metals and alloys, because of their mechanical properties,
have been used for making indirect dental prosthetic restorations
that include inlays/onlays, crowns and bridges, removable partial
frameworks, and implants. A metal-ceramic or porcelain fused to
metal (PFM) system is one in which esthetic ceramics are fused
with metal substrates, where the metal functions as a coping,

Abdelaal.)

supporting substructure (Figure 1-14, A). This allows the combination of metal’s strength and ceramic’s esthetics. Metals are crucial components of corrective orthodontic devices, helpful when
aligning crooked teeth, and are used as a base for the placement
of artificial plastic and ceramic teeth (partial denture framework)
and for retentive features (clasps) in partial denture frameworks
(Figure 1-12).
Ceramics, because of their esthetic appearance, have also been
used to restore lost tooth structure partially (inlays/onlays) or
completely (crowns) or to completely replace a missing tooth or
teeth (multiple-unit fixed dental prostheses or bridges). However, because of the need for high fracture resistance and esthetic
appeal, ceramic prostheses are constructed in multiple layers.
The ceramic-ceramic or all-ceramic structure (Figure 1-14, B)
is similar to metal-ceramic system, except that the metal coping

10

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Metal coping
Opaque porcelain

Hot-pressed lithia
disilicate–based
glass-ceramic core

Body porcelain

Add-on incisal porcelain

Incisal porcelain

A

Transparent porcelain

B

Surface stains transparent glaze

• Figure 1-14 Schematic illustration of two crown prostheses. A, A metal-ceramic crown. The gray region
is the metal coping. The remaining color regions represent various types of ceramics used to render esthetic appearance. B, A lithium disilicate all-ceramic crown. The thin metal coping is replaced with a thick
ceramic core, and the multilayer ceramics are replaced with incisal porcelain.

• Figure 1-15 Wax-up of anterior teeth on a gypsum cast. This approach
is an important step in the decision-making process between the patient
and the clinician for the esthetic outcome and surface stains.

waxes to make wax patterns (Figure 1-15) (Chapter 13, Dental
Waxes), investments for metal casting (Chapter 14, Investment
materials), and finishing and polishing abrasives for shaping and
esthetics (Chapter 16, Benefits of Finishing and Polishing Restorative Materials). Additional materials are used in the auxiliary
capacity but are not discussed as auxiliary materials in this book,
such as plastic matrix for composites (Chapter 5, Finishing and
Polishing of Composites), acid-etching solutions for enhancing
bonding of direct restorations (Chapter 6, Historical Background),
metal matrix for amalgam (Chapter 8, Condensation), and acrylic
resins used to make customized impressions and bleaching trays
(Chapter 11, Resin Impression Trays and Tray Materials).

is replaced with a thicker and tougher ceramic core (Chapter 10,
History of Dental Ceramics).

Challenges of Dental Materials in
the Oral Cavity

Temporary and Provisional Restorative Materials
Temporary restorative materials, also known as provisional
restorative materials, are products used for dental restorations that
are not intended for moderate- or long-term applications. Indirect
prostheses can take some time to be created and delivered, so temporary restorations are applied to protect the prepared tooth by
covering any enamel, dentin, or pulp exposed to the buccal environment. These provisional restorations enable patients to speak
and eat normally. Examples include cements for luting provisional
prosthetic restorations; other restoratives used for fillings; orthodontic wires; and acrylic resins used when making provisional
inlays, onlays, crowns, and fixed dental prostheses that span two
or more tooth positions. Depending on the dental procedures
needed, a temporary/provisional restoration may be in service for
several months and up to a year.

The overriding goal of dentistry is to maintain or improve the
quality of life of the patient. This goal can be met by preventing disease, relieving pain, improving the efficiency of mastication, enhancing speech, and improving appearance after tooth
and bone loss. However, dental restorations and appliances,
compared with the natural dentition, endure additional challenges to withstand the oral environment. For example, as a
replacement or addition to the tooth structure, they need to be
retained in place. A strong and durable tooth/material interphase is desirable. They should resist repeated loading during
occlusion. Both factors dictate the longevity of the restoration.
They should be manipulated following very specific instructions
in order to ensure their intraoral performance. The patient’s
acceptance of the restoration is determined by the esthetic
appearance, cost, and the safety of the material. Evidence of
material/tooth integration through the formation of hydroxyapatite also brings the possible need for tissue repair. These
aspects are discussed in the following sections.

Auxiliary Materials
Several different substances are needed to fabricate dental prostheses, appliances, and direct restorations. These substances, however,
do not constitute part of these devices or restorations and, as a
result, are called auxiliary materials. Among these are impression-making materials, gypsum cast materials to make dies, dental

CRITICAL QUESTION
Retention of restorations can be achieved by mechanical or adhesive means;
what are the advantages and disadvantages of these approaches?

CHAPTER 1

Retention of Restorations
Retention, that is, the action of absorbing and continuing to hold
a substance or material, is a highly relevant interfacial mechanism.
Enamel and dentin, for instance, are two different biological
materials held together by a graded interphase varying smoothly
between the two adherent phases. Restorative materials must be
secured to their intended location to be functional. However,
there was no similar interphase available to hold restorative materials to the tooth structure in the beginning of dentistry.
The early approach was to remove the tooth structure, mainly
to provide a location for macromechanical retention and create
resistance to dislodgement of the restorations. The drawback with
this approach is the common clinical observation of cusp fractures resulting from structural flaws of the tooth structure left
by the surgical removal of decayed tissue (Figure 1-16), tooth
pain caused by dentin hypersensitivity, and root canal therapy to
remove hyperemic or necrotic pulp. Although restorations were
retained satisfactorily by mechanical means, the nonadhesive dental materials of the time often left a discontinuity between the
mechanically prepared surface and the restorative material used,
which could lead to new carious lesions and pulp pathologies.
This scenario led to the development of several pulp-protective
philosophies and materials aimed at minimizing the penetration
of bacteria and their by-products into the pulp, in addition to
thermal insulation.
The acid-etching of enamel, combined with fluid resinous
materials adopted in the 1950s, marked the first step toward
generating a continuous interphase between the restoration
and tooth structure. Technically, the process merely transforms
macromechanical to micromechanical retention, with minimal
tooth reduction beyond the removal of decayed tissue. Much
later, etching of dentin with the same agent was accepted, and
our knowledge of the dentin surface structure after etching
expanded. New strategies of bonding, along with the introduction of new materials, have brought the idea of generating a
stable and strong tooth/restoration interphase one step closer.
Although progress has been made, the durability of this interphase remains a challenge. Adhesion and bonding are discussed
in Chapter 6.

Overview of Dental Materials

11

Restoration Longevity in Terms of
Mechanical Integrity
From both a patient’s and a clinician’s perspective, a restoration
should last a lifetime. Although some materials are expected to
last more than a lifetime, in a real-world scenario, the longevity
of restorations is shorter than expected, especially for direct restorations. According to research, dentists spend more than 50%
of their time replacing failed direct restorations. As a result, the
longevity of dental biomaterials used in restorations is extremely
relevant to the profession and to patients.
One of the major advances in the knowledge of dental materials and their manipulation began in 1919, when the U.S. Army
requested the National Bureau of Standards (now known as the
National Institute of Standards and Technology [NIST]) to establish
specifications for the evaluation and selection of dental amalgams
for use in federal service. The dental profession enthusiastically
received these specifications, and similar specifications were subsequently requested for other dental materials. In 1928, dental
research at the National Bureau of Standards was taken over by the
American Dental Association (ADA).
Standards for dental materials have been developed to aid producers, users, and consumers in the evaluation of the safety and
effectiveness of dental products. The ADA’s Standards Committee on Dental Products (SCDP) develops specifications for dental
materials, oral hygiene products, infection-control products,
dental equipment, and dental instruments. Many countries have
a dental standards organization that is charged with the development of test standards to ensure product reliability and safety.
In addition, TC 106 of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) develops international standards. These international standards often require information about composition;
information about physical properties, as obtained by standard test
methods; biocompatibility data; and data covering every provision
of the official specification. More discussion of these standards is
provided in Chapter 18, Standardization of In Vitro Test Methods.
From a material standpoint, meeting the specification for
mechanical properties means the material possesses enough strength
to withstand occlusal loading, but this does not guarantee durability. As mentioned earlier, the placement of dental materials, or
restorations, over tooth structures leads to an interplay between
solid materials and a series of linked and/or nonlinked, complex
joints. The interfacial position at or within the tooth and the
physical quality of the dental materials involved in this complex
assembly have great effects on the longevity of the restoration.
Other factors, such as the selection of materials, clinical indication, patient awareness of their oral hygiene, and manipulation
of and compliance with the dental material manufacturer’s guidelines, will undoubtedly affect the long-term clinical performance
of the restorations. These aspects will be discussed in more detail
in upcoming chapters.

Esthetic Appearance

• Figure 1-16 Fracture of the buccal cusp of a lower first premolar with an
extensive intraorally serviced amalgam restoration. Open arrows delineate
the area of fracture. Even though the amalgam remained firmly retained
by the remaining tooth structure without the support of the lost cusp, it is
considered a failed restoration and needs replacement.

Another important objective of dentistry is to restore or improve
esthetics—the color and appearance of natural dentition—such as
teeth bleaching with whitening agents. In recent decades, esthetic
considerations in restorative and prosthetic materials have increasingly gained greater emphasis, making the development of generalpurpose, technique-insensitive, tooth-colored, and color-stable
restorative materials a mainstream of dental materials research.
Resin-based composite (Chapter 5, Classification of Composites

12

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

by Clinical Use) and ceramics (Chapter 10, Color Matching Ability and Aesthetic Qualities) are the two most notable examples.
Even though esthetic materials that mimic natural dentition in
color, texture, and reflectance allow the clinician to achieve outstanding esthetic and functional results, they also require strong
artistic abilities. For example, knowledge of the underlying scientific principles of color and other optical effects on the appearance
of the restorative material is essential in order to master esthetic
results. Additionally, effective communication among the clinician, technician, and patient is important to achieve the proposed
goal and avoid unrealistic expectations.

Safety of Dental Materials
Standards for dental materials have been developed to aid producers,
users, and consumers in the evaluation of the safety and effectiveness
of dental products. As mentioned previously, national dentistry standards/specifications have been implemented by the ADA’s SCDP,
and international standards have been implemented by the ISO’s
TC 106. Manufacturers can choose between testing their materials
according to either national or international standards. However, for
a manufacturer to market its product in certain European countries,
a European Conformity (CE) marking must be obtained based on
the product’s ability to meet one or more national or international
standards for performance and quality. A CE marking indicates that
the product complies with European guidelines for health, safety,
and environmental protection legislation.
The existence of material-evaluation standards does not prevent the manufacturing, marketing, purchase, or use of dental
or medical devices that do not meet these standards. However,
producers or marketers of products and devices are expected to
meet the safety standards established for those products in the
countries in which they are sold. Thus, a producer may be given
premarket approval in the United States by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) to sell a dental device or restorative
material without that product being tested by the ADA or any
other agency to determine whether the product is in accordance
with the material’s specifications. Nevertheless, these agencies are
becoming increasingly dependent on one another to ensure that
all products marketed worldwide are safe and effective.
For a dental material to be used in the oral cavity, this material
should be harmless to all oral tissues and contain no toxic, leachable,
or diffusible substance that can be absorbed into the circulatory system, causing systemic toxic responses, including teratogenic or carcinogenic effects. The material must also be free of agents that could
elicit sensitization or an allergic response in a sensitized patient.
These are considered general characteristics of biocompatibility.
Because safety is relative, no dental device (including restorative materials) is completely safe. The selection and use of dental
devices or materials assume that the benefits will far outweigh the
known biological risks. However, there is always the possibility
that a patient will experience adverse effects from dental treatment. The conceptual aspects of biocompatibility, with specific
emphasis on the solid and liquid materials of greatest relevance to
dentistry, are presented in Chapter 17.

Capability of Initiating Tissue Repair or
Regeneration
Although restorative dental materials primarily focus on replacing missing tooth structure or missing teeth with synthetic materials, evidence shows that certain materials have triggered healing

or repair of tooth structure. For example, fluoride ions released in
slightly acidic conditions, along with calcium phosphate, can promote the formation of hydroxyapatite within demineralized enamel
matrix or become incorporated into the crystal lattice as fluorapatite, resulting in a lower solubility of enamel. The newly formed
hydroxyapatite, however, lacks the structure and mechanical properties of natural enamel. As a result, the challenge is to develop
biomimetic approaches in re-creating the hierarchical structure on
the surface of the damaged enamel. Another example is when there
is deep cavitation where dental pulp exposure has occurred, and
a pulp capping agent is used. The response of the pulp to these
materials is a biological healing process leading to the formation of
reparative dentin that protects the remaining healthy pulp.
Understanding the underlying mechanisms of this “natural
healing” biological process enables the clinician to pharmacologically trigger this event for promoting reparative dentine formation.
As restorative dentistry is gradually transforming toward biologydriven repair strategies, replacement, and regeneration, the goal is
regeneration of the entire tooth. The current progress in regenerative dentistry is presented in Chapter 20, Regenerative Dentistry.

The Future Need for Dental Biomaterials
Future developments in dentistry and the need for optimal oral
health care will dictate the future of dental materials science. Dentistry will continue to focus on the preservation and enhancement
of oral health through the prevention of caries, periodontal disease, and their sequelae and the rehabilitation of missing, damaged, or destroyed hard and soft tissues. A cure for dental caries
will have a dramatic impact on the use of restorative materials to
restore form and function to teeth with cavitated lesions. However, there will still exist a continuous need to repair or restore
time-dependent failure or degradation of restorations and a need
for the treatment of noncarious-related issues. As a result, deciding
which materials to use for a given clinical condition or situation
will depend on the known benefits of each treatment choice compared with the known risks.
Because a cure for caries and the development of processes
for root or tooth regeneration are probably several decades away,
most of the restorative materials employed today will likely remain
in use for the foreseeable future. Materials like dental amalgam
(Chapter 8, Safety of Amalgam Restorations), for example, have
made reliable restorations for centuries. The use of amalgam has
been declining rapidly, not because there are more durable and
technique-insensitive restorative materials available in the market
but because of concerns regarding the impact of mercury release
into the environment. Furthermore, the world has moved into
an era of high esthetic demand at the expense of durability and
cost. In contrast to the treatment for dental caries, the demand for
esthetic enhancement will continue well into the future. Development and research for direct restorative biomaterials that are
less technique-sensitive, especially the existing esthetic resin-based
composite brands, still have great room for improvement. In addition, strategies that aim to increase the hardness, toughness and
resistance to wear, and impact of these materials is relevant to the
field. An interesting approach relies on creating composites with
tailored microstructures, or bio-inspired platelet-reinforced composites created by magnetic manipulation of alumina platelets.
The benefits of caries prevention have led to a reduction in the
need for complete and removable dentures. Minimally invasive
concepts have led to the sealing of defective or leaking restorations with preventive resins rather than continuing to use more

CHAPTER 1

destructive replacement procedures. Thus, the development of
effective bio-inspired remineralizing agents for acid-damaged
enamel and dentin repair and the development of smart materials
that lead to self-repair of defective joints or of a material’s internal flaws, as well as dental pulp regeneration, will be critical challenges to the future of dental materials. In addition, the need for
replacement of restorations should decrease over the next several
decades, in lieu of the minimally invasive philosophy. However,
this reduction will be offset by the increased demand for esthetic
restorations (discussed in Chapter 20, Biomaterials).

CRITICAL QUESTION

Overview of Dental Materials

13

Therefore we can conclude that some restorative materials
became obsolete for the following reasons: (1) their drawbacks overall far outweighed their known advantages; (2) material degradation led to undesirable margin adaptation and esthetics; (3) metallic
appearance was generally unacceptable to patients; (4) alternative
restoratives exhibit superior performance, mimic the physiology of
the tooth, and are less technique-sensitive; (5) alternative materials
led to cheaper treatment for patients; and/or (6) improvements in
material microstructure occur as a result of technological advances.
In short, restorative materials become obsolete when an alternative
material is able to provide a better balance among all the previously
mentioned diverse requirements and expectations.

Which factors determine when dental material products become obsolete?

Organization of the Book

Technology has advanced tremendously over the past 40 years,
resulting in innovations such as laser applications, imaging procedures, three-dimensional (3-D) printing technology, lowshrinkage composites, smart ceramics, and minimally invasive
dental procedures, which have generated benefits for several
fields. Computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing
(CAD-CAM) technology for making indirect restorations, for
example, has reduced the demand for both impression materials and some indirect auxiliary materials that were used by laboratory technicians to fabricate indirect prostheses (discussed in
Chapter 15, Digital Impressions and Prototyping Tools).
Subsequently, one question has accompanied the dental profession for centuries: When does a restorative material become obsolete? For example, silicate cement (Chapter 7, History of Dental
Cements) was used to restore anterior esthetic restorations because
the color perception resembled tooth structure, and there was a serendipitous ability to release fluoride. Although the latter is beneficial
in preventing recurrent caries, fluoride release occurs at the expense
of surface degradation, discoloration, and marginal breakdown over
time, resulting in defective and stained margins (Figure 1-17) and
loss of anatomical contour. Furthermore, more durable resin-based
composites and improved micromechanical bonding procedures
made silicate cements virtually obsolete by the mid-1970s.

In 1936, Dr. Skinner, the author of the first edition of this book,
expressed significant concerns regarding the need for knowledge
of dental materials science in the following statement:

• Figure 1-17 Anterior class III silicate cement restorations exhibiting
severe surface degradation, marginal staining, and general discoloration.

Unfortunately, there are too many unscrupulous dental manufacturers who make impossible claims for inferior products, thus
deceiving the dentist. There have been actual cases of highly
advertised dental materials, which have been made extremely popular among dentists simply by clever advertising methods, whereas
careful laboratory tests have shown products to be distinctly inferior.
The well-informed dentist will be able to discriminate between fact
and propaganda and will refuse to be duped in this manner.
He emphasized the need for the principles of physics and chemistry to be applied in restorative dentistry in a similar manner as
they were applied to structural engineering. Although there have
been many technological advancements since 1936 that improved
the quality of dental materials, a challenge remains for end users to
critically evaluate the claims made for the performance of dental
materials and to carefully relate these claims to well-established
physical principles for specific classes of materials. The current era
of evidence-based dentistry is consistent with our aims of presenting fundamental principles of materials and understanding causeand-effect relationships that allow us to predict, with reasonable
certainty, the time-dependent behavior of dental materials.
To achieve these aims, this book is organized into five parts:
(I) General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials; (II) Direct
Restorative Materials; (III) Indirect Restorative and Prosthetic
Materials; (IV) Fabrication of Prostheses; and (V) Assessing Dental Restorations.
Following the overview of dental materials in this chapter, Part I
focuses on the structure and properties of materials. Chapter 2
explains how the molecular or crystalline structure determines the
classes of materials and renders each class its unique properties.
This chapter also discusses the origin of adhesion, an important
feature of dental restorations. Chapter 3 discusses the physical and
chemical properties relevant to dental applications, and Chapter 4
examines the mechanical properties of dental materials.
The chapters in Part II focus on direct restorative materials,
including resin-based composites (Chapter 5), bonding agents
(Chapter 6), dental cements (Chapter 7), and metallic-based restorations (Chapter 8). As stated earlier, these materials share the
same feature of being manipulated chairside and applied to the
oral cavity before they reach their full functional state. Therefore
preventive materials are discussed with direct restorative materials.
The chapters in Part III discuss the use of indirect restorative materials, such as dental casting alloys and wrought metals

14

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

(Chapter 9), ceramic-based materials (Chapter 10), denture-base
resins (Chapter 11), and dental implants (Chapter 12).
Chapter 13 through 16 in Part IV describe the materials and
technologies needed to fabricate indirect prostheses. Chapter 13
discusses auxiliary materials, which include impression materials, gypsum products, and dental waxes, which are used to fabricate the wax patterns needed for final prostheses. The process of
making metal castings using the lost wax method is discussed in
Chapter 14, and Chapter 15 discusses the use of digital technology
for making dental prostheses without using traditional auxiliary
materials but instead relying on digital imaging and CAD-CAM
technology. Finally, all restorations, direct or indirect, require certain degrees of surface modification to improve their clinical performance. The procedures and the essential instruments used for
finishing and polishing restorations are discussed in Chapter 16.
The goal of dentistry is to maintain or improve the quality of
life of the patient. The restorations involved must prevent disease,
relieve pain, improve the efficiency of mastication, enhance speech,
improve appearance, and most importantly, last for a long time.
Part V aims to address the question of how we assess restorations.
As stated, all materials undergo some sort of interaction with the

oral tissue. The biological considerations, known as biocompatibility, are covered in Chapter 17. In vitro testing is conducted by
subjecting a material made in a certain configuration to a known
external factor (or factors) in a well-defined condition and recording the material’s response to such factors. The significance of in
vitro testing is discussed in Chapter 18. Clinical evaluations of
a dental restoration represent a different level of assessment for
restorations. Chapter 19 discusses the components of clinical studies, using one to illustrate how variables can be collected from the
study. Finally, although new materials that address the particular
needs of restorative dentistry are emerging and alternative treatment philosophies are being adopted, the advancement of new
technologies in other disciplines has benefited dental materials
science in a variety of ways. Chapter 20 analyzes potential future
technologies in dentistry and describes both recently emerged
technologies and those anticipated in the coming decades.

Selected Readings

Munksgaard EC: Toxicology versus allergy in restorative dentistry, Adv
Dent Res 6:17–21, 1992.
Nanci A: Ten Cate’s Oral Histology: Development, Structure, and Function,
9th ed, St. Louis, 2018, Elsevier.
Stock SR, Vieira AE, Delbem AC, et al: Synchrotron micro computed
tomography of the mature bovine dentinoenamel junction, J Struct
Biol 161:162–171, 2008.
Thompson VP, Watson TF, Marshall GW Jr, et al: Outside-the-(cavityprep)-box thinking, Adv Dent Res 25:24–32, 2013.
Volponi1 AA, Zaugg LK, Neves V, et al: Tooth repair and regeneration,
Curr Oral Health Rep 5:295–303, 2018.

Borcic J, Anic I, Urek MM, et al: The prevalence of non-carious cervical
lesions in permanent dentition, J Oral Rehabil 31:117–123, 2004.
Erb RM, Libanori R, Rothfuchs N, et al: Composites reinforced in three
dimensions by using low magnetic fields, Science 335:199–204, 2012.
He LH, Swain MV: Understanding the mechanical behaviour of human
enamel from its structural and compositional characteristics, J Mech
Behav Biomed Mater 1:18–29, 2008.
Hensten-Pettersen A, Jacobsen N: Perceived side effects of biomaterials in
prosthetic dentistry, J Prosthet Dent 65:138–144, 1991.
Jäger I, Fratzl P: Mineralized collagen fibrils: A mechanical model with a staggered arrangement of mineral particles, Biophys J 79:1737–1746, 2000.
Lobbezoo F, Ahlberg J, Raphael KG, et al: International consensus on the
assessment of bruxism: Report of a work in progress, J Oral Rehabil
45:837–844, 2018.

Acknowledgment
The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. Kenneth J. Anusavice for his
contribution to the earlier editions of this chapter.

Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
ADA Standards Committee on Dental Products (ADA SCDP) ADA
website: https://www.ada.org/en/science-research/dental-standards/dental
-products.
This website provides details on ANSI/ADA specifications for dental
materials, instruments, and equipment and the working groups of the
ADA Standards Committee on Dental Products.
Borcic J, Anic I, Urek MM, et al: The prevalence of non-carious cervical
lesions in permanent dentition, J Oral Rehabil 31:117–123, 2004.
Coleman RL: Physical Properties of Dental Materials (Gold alloys and accessory
materials), Research Paper No. 32, Washington, DC, 1928, US Government Printing Office.
Cramer NB, Stansbury JW, Bowman CN: Recent advances and developments in composite dental restorative materials, J Dent Res 90:402–416,
2011.
This publication represents the first major effort to relate the physical
properties of dental materials to the clinical situation. The American
Dental Association specification program was established based on this
historical review of the philosophy and the content of the facility created
at the National Bureau of Standards (now National Institute of Standards and Technology).
Erb RM, Libanori R, Rothfuchs N, et al: Composites reinforced in three
dimensions by using low magnetic fields, Science 335:199–204,
2012.
Gibbs CH, Anusavice KJ, Young HM, et al: Maximum clenching force of
patients with moderate loss of posterior tooth support: A pilot study,
J Prosthet Dent 88:498–502, 2002.
The ability to sustain a maximum clenching force for a period of 2 s was
reported in this study.

He LH, Swain MV: Understanding the mechanical behaviour of human
enamel from its structural and compositional characteristics, J Mech
Behav Biomed Mater 1:18–29, 2008.
Hensten-Pettersen A, Jacobsen N: Perceived side effects of biomaterials
in prosthetic dentistry, J Prosthet Dent 65:138–144, 1991.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) website: https://www.
iso.org/home.html.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) TC 106—Dentistry
website. https://www.iso.org/committee/51218.html.
Jäger I, Fratzl P: Mineralized collagen fibrils: A mechanical model with a
staggered arrangement of mineral particles, Biophys J 79:1737–1746,
2000.
Kallus T, Mjör IA: Incidence of adverse effects of dental materials, Eur J Oral
Sci 99:236–240, 1991.
Lobbezoo F, Ahlberg J, Raphael KG, et al: International consensus on
the assessment of bruxism: Report of a work in progress, J Oral
Rehabil 45:837–844, 2018.
Munksgaard EC: Toxicology versus allergy in restorative dentistry, Adv Dent
Res 6:17–21, 1992.
Nanci A: Ten Cate’s oral histology: development, structure, and function, 9th ed,
St. Louis, 2018, Elsevier.
Phillips RW: Changing trends of dental restorative materials, Dent Clin
North Am 33:285–291, 1989.
Stock SR, Vieira AE, Delbem AC, et al: Synchrotron micro computed
tomography of the mature bovine dentinoenamel junction, J Struct
Biol 161:162–171, 2008.
Thompson VP, Watson TF, Marshall GW Jr, et al: Outside-the-(cavityprep)-box thinking, Adv Dent Res 25:24–32, 2013.
Volponi1 AA, Zaugg LK, Neves V, et al: Tooth repair and regeneration,
Curr Oral Health Rep 5:295–303, 2018.

14.e1

2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of
Material and Principles of Adhesion
OUTLINE
Interaction Between Two Atoms

Polymers

Types of Bonding

Composite Materials

Atomic Arrangement

Adhesion and Bonding

Metals

Bonding to Tooth Structure

Ceramics

KEY TERMS
Adhesion An attraction between two contacting surfaces promoted by the interfacial force of attraction between the molecules or atoms of two different species; adhesion may occur as
chemical adhesion, mechanical adhesion (structural interlocking), or a combination of both.
Adhesive and adherend Substance that promotes adhesion of
one substance or material to another. An adherend is a material
substrate bonded to another material by means of an adhesive.
Alloy and alloy system An alloy is a crystalline solid with metallic
properties that is composed of two or more elements, at least
one of which is a metal, and all of which are mutually soluble in
the molten state. Alloy systems are all possible alloyed combinations of two or more elements, at least one of which is a metal.
For example, the binary gold-silver system includes all possible
alloys of gold and silver, varying from 100% gold and 0% silver
to 100% silver and 0% gold.
Bonding The action of joining objects or particles together by
means of adhesive or force of attraction.
Ceramic Solid-phase compounds of metallic and nonmetallic
elements.
Cohesion Bonding between molecules or atoms of the same species.
Composite A material made of two or more constituent components with significantly different physical or chemical properties
that, when combined, produce a material with characteristics
different from the individual components.
Contact angle Angle of intersection between a liquid and a surface of a solid that is measured from the solid surface through
the liquid to the liquid/vapor tangent line originating at the
terminus of the liquid/solid interface; used as a measure of wettability, whereby no wetting occurs at a contact angle of 180°,
and complete wetting occurs at an angle of 0°.
Copolymer Polymer made of two or more types of monomers.
A random copolymer is when there is no sequential order of
monomer types along the polymer chain. A block copolymer
is when groups of each type of monomer appear in the same

polymer chain. A graft or branched copolymer is when a sequence of one type of mer unit is grafted onto the backbone of
a second type of monomer to form a branched structure.
Crosslink A difunctional or multifunctional monomer that forms
a link between two growing polymer chains during polymerization that results in a three-dimensional interconnected polymer
network.
Curing Chemical reaction in which low-molecular-weight monomers are converted into higher-molecular-weight materials
through polymerization to attain desired properties.
Elastic recovery The shape of objects changes under an applied
force. When the force is removed, the object will recover to its
original shape instantly if it is an elastic solid, or the recovery
process occurs over a period of time if it is a viscoelastic material.
The greater the viscous nature of a material, the less complete
the recovery.
Glass-transition temperature (Tg) (1) The temperature above
which a sharp increase in the thermal expansion coefficient occurs, indicating increased molecular mobility. (2) The temperature at which macromolecule molecular motion begins to force
the polymer chains apart. Thus polymeric materials soften when
heated above this temperature.
Grain and grain boundary A grain is a single crystal in the microstructure of a metal. Metals and alloys are solids consisting
of many individual grains, and the interface between adjacent
grains is the grain boundary.
Metal (1) An element or alloy whose atoms readily lose electrons to
form positively charged ions. (2) A metallic material composed of
one or more elements that is opaque, ductile, relatively malleable,
a good conductor of electricity, a good thermal conductor, and
usually lustrous when light is reflected from its polished surface.
Microstructure Structural features of a surface, including grains,
grain boundaries, phases, and defects, such as porosity, revealed
by microscopic imaging of the chemically or electrolytically
etched surface of a flat, polished specimen.

15

16

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Micromechanical bonding Retention associated with an adhesive
penetrating a roughened adherend surface.
Monomer and mer A monomer is a chemical compound that is
capable of reacting to form a polymer; each monomer becomes
a mer of a polymer.
Phase and phase diagram (constitution diagram) A graph of
equilibrium phases and solubility limits for an alloy system as a
function of composition and temperature.
Polymer Large molecules (a.k.a. macromolecules) formed by the
union of many simple repeating units (mers); the chemical
process is known as polymerization.
Primary bond Bonding between atoms that include ionic, covalent, and metallic bonds.
Resin or synthetic resin Blend of monomers and/or macromolecules with other components, which form a material with a set
of useful properties.
Solid solution (metallic) A solid crystalline phase containing two
or more elements, at least one of which is a metal and whose
atoms share the same crystal lattice.
Strain Magnitude of deformation (stretching, compression, or
shear) occurring in response to an applied force.
Stress The perpendicularly directed force, exerted as pressure or
tension, on a material that causes the object to deform (strain),
measured in units of force per unit area.
Surface energy The excess energy of attraction that the surface
of a material (liquid and solid) has compared with the bulk of
the material because molecules or atoms at the surface are

not surrounded by their fellows as those in the bulk. It can
be treated as the work (energy) required to build an area of a
particular surface and has the unit of mN/m2.
Surface tension The tendency of fluid surfaces to contract to the
smallest surface area by an inward force caused by the imbalance of mutual attraction between molecules on the liquid
surface. The very inward force also keeps the molecules of the
surface constantly under tension. The cohesive force keeping
molecules bonded on the surface is known as the surface tension of the liquid, with the unit of mN/m.
Thermoplastic polymer Macromolecule material made of linear
and/or branched chains that softens when heated above the
glass-transition temperature (Tg); it can then be molded to a new
shape and cooled below the Tg to retain the new configuration.
Thermoset polymer Polymeric material that retains a crosslinked
structure during polymerization; the acquired structure results
in a rigid polymer that, upon heating, does not soften enough
to be molded to a new configuration.
van der Waals forces Short-range force of physical attraction that
promotes adhesion between molecules of liquids or molecular
crystals. Also known as secondary bond.
Wetting and wetting agent Wetting is the ability of a liquid to maintain contact with a solid surface; it reflects the intermolecular interactions when the two are brought in intimate contact. A wetting
agent is a surface-active substance that can be applied to a solid
substrate to reduce the surface tension of the liquid to be placed
on the solid; the purpose is to promote wetting or adhesion.

All matter is composed of indivisible particles called atoms, the
smallest size of particles having properties identical to those of bulk
material. The commonly accepted structure of atoms consists of
three subatomic particles, a negatively charged electron, a positively
charged proton, and an electrically neutral neutron, as depicted
in the electron cloud model of a nitrogen atom (Figure 2-1). The
nucleus contains a mix of protons and neutrons, except for the
hydrogen atoms, where there are no neutrons. Neutrons and protons are held together by nuclear force that is stronger than the
repulsion forces between protons. Nuclear force only acts at an
extremely short distance (≅1 × 10−15 m) and does not affect the
electromagnetic attraction. The electrons of an atom exist in different clouds at the various energy levels (shells). An atom becomes
a negative ion when it gains an electron(s) or a positive ion when

it loses an electron(s). The number of electrons in the shells of the
cloud dictates the property of the matter made of that group of
atoms. These electrons are also called valence electrons.

Proton

Nucleus

Electron

Neutron

• Figure 2-1 Electron-cloud model of a nitrogen atom. The neutrons (blue
spheres) and protons (aqua spheres with “+”) occupy a dense central region called the nucleus. The orange cloud formation illustrates the trace of
electrons (spheres with “–”) as they move around the nucleus.

CRITICAL QUESTION
When the state of material (vapor, liquid, and solid) changes, what happens
between atoms or molecules that make up the material?

Two or more atoms can bond together and form an electrically neutral entity called a molecule. The attraction between atoms
within a molecule is strong, whereas the attractions between molecules are weaker. These attractions result in materials we can see
and touch. Consider water as an example. Chemically, the basic
unit of water is a molecule made of two hydrogen atoms and one
oxygen atom. If each molecule attains a kinetic energy that is higher
than the attraction between these molecules, they appear in vapor
form. Kinetic energy is what allows molecules of known mass to
maintain a constant in motion. As the surrounding temperature
decreases, the level of kinetic energy within individual molecules
decreases, and the attraction between them becomes more prominent so that they condense to liquid form. Further cooling yields
a solid called ice, where the kinetic energy is so low that the molecules are immobilized by attraction forces among them.
The transformation between vapor, liquid, and solid is called
change of state, which is an example of how the attraction between
molecules and the environment affects the behavior of a material as we observe it. The focus of this chapter will be on how the
atomic and molecular attractions shape the four classes of materials used in dentistry, namely, metals, ceramics, polymers, and

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

17

Interatomic force

Resultant force

0
Interatomic
distance

Equilibrium position
(resultant force = 0)

A
Attractive
force

Interatomic potential energy

We can treat each atom as a discrete entity with definite boundaries and volume established by the electromagnetic fields of the
electrons. When two atoms interact with each other in space,
they feel an attraction force from the interaction of the oppositecharged particles of either atom and an expulsion force from
the interaction of the similar-charged particles of either atom.
At a large distance, the interaction between atoms is negligible
(Figure 2-2, A). In Figure 2-2, A, the repulsion and attraction
forces are plotted as a function of the interatomic spacing, which
is the distance between the centers of the cores of the atoms. When
the atoms come close to each other, both forces increase as the distance between the atoms decreases. Initially, the force of attraction
increases faster than the force of repulsion. The repulsion force is a
short-range force compared with the attractive force that becomes
noticed at a closer range. Later, the force of repulsion increases
much more than the force of attraction as the atoms get closer. The
resultant force, which is the sum of attraction and repulsion forces,
increases initially as attraction force when the two atoms get close.
As the repulsion force increases, the resultant attractive force, after
reaching a peak, starts to decline. It then reaches a state of equilibrium when the valence electron shells of the two atoms keep the
atoms from getting closer. At the state of equilibrium, there is no
net resultant force (Figure 2-2, A). In other words, the atoms have
reached a stable state. Before the atoms reach equilibrium, we can
treat the resultant force as the force needed to keep them apart at
that distance. After equilibrium, the negative resultant force means
that external force is needed to push the atoms closer. There is a
great deal of repulsion to overcome. Depending on the number
of valence electrons and species of atoms involved, there are three
types of interaction between atoms when equilibrium is reached.

Repulsion

Interaction Between Two Atoms

Attraction

composites, and affect their behavior in their respective applications. Finally, we will discuss how we can use these bonding
mechanisms to our advantage.

Repulsive
force

Resultant force

Interatomic
distance

Energy at
equilibrium position

Bond Distance

B

Regardless of the type of structure in the solid state, there is a limiting factor that prevents the atoms or molecules from approaching each other too closely. The position at which both attraction
and repulsion forces are equal in magnitude (but opposite in
direction) is considered the equilibrium position of the atoms
(Figure 2-2, A). The interatomic distance at equilibrium represents the sum of the radii of the two adjacent atoms.

• Figure 2-2 Interaction between two atoms. The blue atom is stationary,

Bond Energy
Because the conditions of equilibrium are usually described in
terms of energy rather than interatomic forces, the relationships in Figure 2-2, A can be logically explained in terms of
interatomic energy, which is also known as bond energy or
potential energy. Energy is defined as the product of force and
distance. Integration of the interatomic force (dashed line in
Figure 2-2, A) over the interatomic distance yields the interatomic energy (solid line in Figure 2-2, B). In contrast with the
resultant force, the bond energy can be treated as the energy
needed to keep two atoms apart. Initially, the bond energy
decreases gradually as two atoms come closer together. As the
resultant attractive force passes the peak and begins to decline
rapidly, the bond energy also decreases steeply (Figure 2-2, B).

and the orange atom is moving toward or away from the blue atom. The
bond distance is the distance between the core center of the two atoms.
A, Relation of interatomic forces to interatomic distance. The resultant
force (– –) is the sum of attraction (——) and repulsion (——) forces. At the
equilibrium position (——), either a negative (repulsive) or a positive (attractive) force is required to move the atom out of its equilibrium position.
B, Integration of the resultant force (– –) shown in A over the interatomic
distance yields the interatomic energy (——). Note that the potential energy
is at minimum when equilibrium (——) is reached. The tangent of the resultant force at equilibrium (——) is the slope of the curve.

The bond energy reaches a minimum when the resultant force
becomes zero. Thereafter, the energy increases rapidly because
the resultant force becomes repulsive and increases rapidly with
little change in interatomic distance. The minimum energy
corresponds to the condition of equilibrium and defines the
equilibrium interatomic distance.

Influence of Interatomic Bond
The atoms are in a constant state of vibration, and the average amplitude is dependent on the temperature; the higher the

18

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

temperature, the greater is the amplitude and, consequently, the
greater is the kinetic energy. At a certain temperature, the minimal
energy required to maintain equilibrium is denoted by the bottom
of the trough in Figure 2-2, B. As the temperature increases, the
amplitude of the atomic (or molecular) vibration increases. It follows also that the mean interatomic distance increases (Figure 2-3),
as does the internal energy. The overall effect is the phenomenon
known as thermal expansion.
As the temperature increases from T0 to T5 in Figure 2-3, A,
the mean increase in interatomic distance is less with the deeper
energy trough (Figure 2-3, A) than that in the shallower energy
trough (Figure 2-3, B). This means that the linear coefficient of
thermal expansion (α) of materials with similar atomic or molecular structures tends to be inversely proportional to the melting
temperature. If the temperature continues to increase, the increase
in interatomic distance will result in a change of state, where solid
melts to a liquid, and liquid subsequently vaporizes to gas. For
a solid with lower potential energy (i.e., a deeper trough depth)
(Figure 2-3, A), greater amounts of kinetic energy are required to
achieve melting and boiling, which corresponds to higher melting
and boiling temperatures.
As shown in Figure 2-2, A, the net force on the atoms at the
equilibrium distance is zero, but small displacements, as in an

Interatomic potential energy

Center of vibration
with increased energy
Interatomic
distance

Types of Bonding
The preceding discussion establishes the role of bonding in the
change of state and interatomic bond energy of the thermal and
mechanical properties. When the atoms are in the equilibrium
state with the neighboring atoms, they establish different types
of bonds according to the valence of their electrons. The electron
structure of an atom is relatively stable if it has eight electrons in
its outer valence shell, as noble gases do, except for helium, which
has only two electrons. Other atoms must lose, acquire, or share
electrons with yet other atoms to achieve a stable configuration—
that is, eight electrons in the outer shell. These processes produce
strong primary bonds between atoms. Intermolecular bonds, on
the other hand, rely on dipole forces induced by nonuniform distribution of electrons within the molecule. These are often weaker
and are called secondary bonds.

Primary Bonds
The formation of primary bonds depends on the atomic structures
and their tendency to assume a stable configuration. The strength
of these bonds and their ability to re-form after breakage determine the physical properties of a material. Primary atomic bonds
(Figure 2-4), also called chemical bonds, may be of three different
types: (1) ionic, (2) covalent, and (3) metallic.

T5
T4
T3
T2
T1
T0

A
Interatomic potential energy

increased bond distance, result in rapidly increasing forces to
maintain the equilibrium distance. The magnitude of this force
needed to maintain the displacement is commonly referred
to as the elastic modulus or stiffness of the material, and this
property will be discussed in detail in Chapter 4, Stress-Strain
Properties. The stiffness or elastic modulus of the material is
proportional to the rate of change of the force with a change
in displacement that is measured by the slope of the net-force
curve drawn from the equilibrium (Figure 2-2, B). A greater
slope of the force curve implies a narrower, deeper trough in
the energy curve (Figure 2-3, A). Hence, a high melting point
is usually accompanied by a greater stiffness.
The preceding principles represent generalities, and exceptions
do occur. Nevertheless, they allow one to estimate the influence
of temperature on the properties of most of the dental materials
discussed in subsequent chapters.

Center of vibration
with increased energy
Interatomic
distance
T5
T4
T3
T2
T1
T0

B
• Figure 2-3 Thermal energy and bond energy. As the temperature rises
from T0 to T5, the interatomic distance increases. For the solid with a deeper potential energy trough (A), the actual increase in distance is less than
that of the solid with a shallower potential energy trough (B). Therefore
less thermal expansion and a higher melting temperature are expected for
(A). In addition, a high melting temperature usually is accompanied by a
greater stiffness.

Ionic Bonds
The classic example of ionic bonding is the bond between the Na+
and Cl– of sodium chloride (Figure 2-4, A). Because the sodium
atom contains one valence electron in its outer shell and the chlorine atom has seven electrons in its outer shell, the transfer of the
sodium valence electron to the chlorine atom results in the stable
compound Na+Cl–. In dentistry, ionic bonding exists in some dental materials, such as in gypsum and phosphate-based cements.
Covalent Bonds
A covalent bond is a chemical bond that involves the sharing of
electron pairs between atoms. Figure 2-4, B shows that the fluorine
molecule shares a pair of electrons. By virtue of sharing electrons,
the two atoms are held together by covalent bonds to form a molecule that is sufficiently stable and electrically neutral in a definite
arrangement. The hydrogen molecule, H2, exemplifies covalent
bonding. The single valence electron in each hydrogen atom is
shared with that of the other combining atom, and the valence
shells become stable. Covalent bonding occurs in many organic

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

compounds, such as dental resins, where they link to form the
backbone structure of hydrocarbon chains.

Metallic Bonds
The third type of primary atomic interaction is the metallic
bond (Figure 2-4, C). It is found in elements with one, two, or
three valence electrons. The outer-shell valence electrons can be
removed easily from metallic atoms and form positive ions. The
free valence electrons can move about in the metal space lattice to
form what is sometimes described as an electron “cloud” or “gas.”
The electromagnetic attraction between the electron cloud and the
positive ions in the lattice provides the force that bonds the metal
atoms together as a solid. The free electrons give the metal its
characteristically high thermal and electrical conductivity. These
electrons absorb light energy, so all metals are opaque to transmitted light. The metallic bonds are also responsible for the ability of
plastic deformation of metals. Plastic deformation means a material
can be reshaped by force without fracture. The free electrons can
move through the lattice, whereas their plastic deformability is
associated with slip along crystal planes. During slip deformation,
electrons easily regroup to retain the cohesive nature of the metal.

Na

A

Combination of Primary Bonds
Although we can describe the three primary bonds separately, it is
also possible to find more than one type of primary bond existing in
one material. Consider calcium sulfate (CaSO4), the main ingredient
of gypsum products (Chapter 13, Gypsum Products), as an example. In the sulfate ion (SO42–), the sulfur and oxygen atoms are held
together covalently but are short two electrons. Calcium has two
electrons in the outer orbit, which are easily removed and transferred
to the SO4. The result is a Ca2+ ion with attraction for an SO42– ion.

Secondary Bonds
In contrast with primary bonds, secondary bonds do not share
electrons between molecules. Instead, the asymmetrical distribution of electrons within each molecule induces dipole forces that
attract molecules together.

Van der Waals Forces
Van der Waals forces of attraction arise from dipole attractions
(Figure 2-5). In the case of polar molecules, dipoles are induced
by an unequal sharing of electrons (Figure 2-5, A). In the case of

Cl

Na+

Cl

Ionic bond

-

B

19

Shared electrons

C

• Figure 2-4 Primary bonds. A, Ionic bond, characterized by electron transfer from one element (Na)
to another (Cl). B, Covalent bond, characterized by electron sharing and very precise bond orientations.
Fluorine molecules (F2) share one pair of electrons. C, Metallic bond, characterized by electron sharing and
the formation of a “cloud” of electrons that bonds to the positively charged nucleus in a lattice.

Chance charge
separation
Fluctuating
dipole

A second
molecule
Charged separation
induced by the first
molecule

Attraction
Repulsion
Van der Waals

A
B
interaction
• Figure 2-5 Van der Waals forces by dipole attraction. A, Polar compound; the attraction and repulsion
between molecules are induced by a permanent dipole moment resulting from asymmetrical electron distribution within the molecule. B, Nonpolar compound; a temporary dipole (fluctuating dipole) occurs when
the symmetrical distribution of electrons in a molecule becomes asymmetrical temporarily; it then attracts
the dipole to adjacent molecules, resulting in the eventual interaction.

20

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

nonpolar molecules, the random movement of electrons within
the molecule creates fluctuating dipoles (Figure 2-5, B). Dipoles
generated within these molecules will attract other similar dipoles.
Such interatomic forces are quite weak compared with the primary bonds.

Hydrogen Bond
The hydrogen bond is a special case of dipole attraction of polar
compounds. It can be understood by studying a water molecule (Figure 2-6). Attached to the oxygen atom are two hydrogen atoms. These bonds are covalent. Therefore the protons of
the hydrogen atoms pointing away from the oxygen atom are
not shielded efficiently by the electrons. They become positively
charged. On the opposite side of the water molecule, the electrons
that fill the outer shell of the oxygen provide a negative charge. The
positive hydrogen nucleus is attracted to the unshared electrons of

neighboring water molecules. This type of bond is called a hydrogen bridge. Polarity of this nature is important in accounting for
the intermolecular reactions in many organic compounds—for
example, the sorption of water by synthetic dental resins.

Atomic Arrangement
All materials we use consist of trillions of atoms. As described
earlier, they are attracted to each other and retain a physical
appearance. The question is in which configuration they are held
together. In 1665, Robert Hooke explained crystal shapes in terms
of the packing of their component parts, like stacking musket balls
in piles. This is an exact model of the atomic structure of many
familiar metals, with each ball representing an atom.
In the solid state, atoms combine in a manner that ensures
minimal internal energy and the most efficient packing of atoms.
For example, sodium and chlorine share one electron at the atomic
scale. In the solid state, like grains of salt, they do not exist in individual pairs; in fact, each sodium ion is attracted to six chlorine
ions, and vice versa (Figure 2-7). They form a regularly spaced
configuration (long-range repetitive space lattice) known as a crystal. A space lattice can be defined as any arrangement of atoms in
space in which every atom is situated similarly to every other atom.
There are structures where regularly spaced configurations do
not occur in the solid state. For example, the molecules of some
of the waxes used by a dentist or laboratory technician are distributed at random when solidified. This noncrystalline formation is
also known as an amorphous structure.

Crystalline Structure

• Figure 2-6 Hydrogen-bond formation between water molecules. The
polar water molecule bonds to adjacent water molecules via an H (orange)
O (blue) interaction between molecules.

A

There are 14 possible lattice types. The type of space lattice is defined
by the length of the three unit cell edges (a-, b-, and c-axes) and the
angles (α, β, and γ) between the edges. The simplest and most regular lattice is a cubic, as shown in Figure 2-8, A; it is characterized by
axes that are all equal length and meet at 90° angles, representing
the smallest repetitive volume of a crystal, which is called a unit cell.
Each sphere represents the positions of the atoms. Their positions
are located at the points of intersection of three planes, each plane
(surface of the cube) being perpendicular to the other two planes.
These planes are often referred to as crystal planes. However, the
simple cubic arrangements shown in Figure 2-8, A, is hypothetical
because it leaves enough space to fit additional atoms per unit cell.

B

• Figure 2-7 The atomic arrangement of table salt. A, Sphere model showing that atoms are actually
closely packed together. B, Ball-and-stick model displaying the three-dimensional position of the atoms
and bonds between them. The orange spheres are chlorine ions, and the blue spheres are sodium ions.

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

21

α

β
γ

A

B

C

• Figure 2-8 Unit cells of the cubic space lattices. A, Simple cubic. B, Body-centered cubic. C, Facecentered cubic.
Most metals used in dentistry belong to the cubic system. For
example, iron at room temperature has an atom at each corner
of the cube and another atom at the body center of the cube
(Figure 2-7, B). This crystal form is called a body-centered cubic
(BCC) cell. Copper, on the other hand, has additional atoms at
the center of each face of the unit cell but none at the center
of the cube. This form is called a face-centered cubic (FCC) cell
(Figure 2-7, C). At first glance of Figure 2-7, B, one may think
NaCl retains a simple cubic crystal if we consider that sodium
and chlorine occupy the same lattice. That is incorrect. Sodium
atoms occupy an FCC lattice, and chlorine atoms occupy their
own FCC lattice. The two FCC lattices interpenetrate to form
the final lattice. Other types of space lattices of dental interest
are shown in Figure 2-9. The hexagonal close-packed arrangement
(Figure 2-9, G) observed in titanium, zinc, and zirconium has
become an important crystalline structure in dentistry. Note that
each unit cell consists of three layers of atoms, and the base, being
hexagonal, has a 120° edge.
All metallic-based dental materials are crystalline. Some pure
ceramics, such as alumina and zirconia core materials, are entirely
crystalline.

Noncrystalline Structure
Glass is a typical noncrystalline solid of SiO2 because its atoms
tend to be arranged in nonrepeating units (Figure 2-10). The
ordered arrangement of the glass is locally interspersed with a considerable number of disordered units. Because this arrangement is
also typical of liquids, such solids are sometimes called supercooled
liquids. Because of the complexity of the physical configuration of
polymer chains, the molecules of resins are not favored to arrange
in orderly, repeating patterns. Therefore polymer-based materials
used in dentistry are usually noncrystalline.
The structural arrangements of the noncrystalline solids do not
represent such low internal energies as do crystalline arrangements
of the same atoms and molecules. Noncrystalline solids do not
have a definite melting temperature but, rather, gradually soften
as the temperature is raised. The temperature at which there is
an abrupt increase in the thermal expansion coefficient, indicating increased molecular mobility, is called the glass-transition
temperature (Tg) (Figure 2-11); it is characteristic of the glassy
structure. Below Tg, the material loses its fluid characteristics and
gains significant resistance to shear deformation. When set, synthetic dental resins are examples of materials that often have glassy
structures, with Tg greater than body temperature.
Many dental materials often consist of a noncrystalline glassy
matrix and crystalline inclusions (filler phase). Crystalline inclusions provide desired properties, including color, opacity, increased
thermal expansion coefficients, and in some dental ceramics,

increased radiopacity. The filler phase of resin-based composites
(Chapter 5, Fillers), on the other hand, can be crystalline, such as
quartz particles or noncrystalline glass spheres.

Diffusion
When we place a drop of ink in a bowl of water, we observe the
spread of the ink in the water. It will eventually disperse throughout the entire body of the water. This process is called diffusion.
The same process also occurs within solid materials but at a substantially slower rate. An understanding of diffusion in a solid
requires two new concepts.
First, the atoms in a space lattice, as previously described, are
constantly in vibration about their centers. However, the atoms
in the material do not all possess the same level of energy. Rather,
there is a distribution of atoms with energy that varies from very
low to high, with the average energy at equilibrium. If the energy
possessed by an atom exceeds the bond energy, it can move to
another position in the lattice.
Second, there are a finite number of missing atoms (called
vacancies) within a solid formed during solidification. A noncrystalline structure, because of short-range order, also contributes
some space. Both conditions represent pathways through which
diffusion can occur. Atoms change position in pure, single-element solids even under equilibrium conditions; this process is
known as self-diffusion. As with any diffusion process, the atoms
or molecules diffuse in the solid state to reach an equilibrium
state. Just as ink disperses uniformly in water, a concentration
of atoms in a solid metal can also be redistributed through the
diffusion process.
Diffusion may also occur in the other direction to produce a
concentration of atoms in a solid. For example, if the sugar in
water becomes supersaturated, the molecules of sugar diffuse
toward each other, and the sugar crystallizes out of solution. In
the same manner, a solid copper-silver alloy, to be discussed in
Phase Diagram, with a higher copper concentration may cause
supersaturation of copper in silver, which forces the diffusion of
copper atoms to increase the concentration of copper locally,
causing them to precipitate.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are mercury and gallium of interest as components of direct restorative
materials?

The diffusion of elements in most crystalline solids at room
temperature is very low. Yet at temperatures that are a few hundred degrees higher, the bond energy between atoms decreases,
thus allowing rapid atomic diffusion. For the same reason, the

22

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

α

A

γ

B

C

D

γ

E

F

γ

H

G

• Figure 2-9 Other lattice types of dental interest. A, Rhombohedral. B, Orthorhombic. C, Monoclinic.
D, Triclinic. E, Tetragonal. F, Simple hexagonal. G, Close-packed hexagonal. H, Rhombic.

Si

A

O

B

• Figure 2-10 Two-dimensional illustration of crystalline (left) and noncrystalline (right) forms of SiO2.

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

Volume

Liquid

Melting
s
Glas

ine

tall

s
Cry

Tg

Tm

Temperature

• Figure 2-11 Plot of glass-transition temperature. The glass-transition temperature (Tg) differs from the melting temperature (Tm), where a
crystalline solid changes to a liquid state with an increase of volume. Tg
marks the temperature at which major segments of polymer chains begin
to gain some translational freedom, as observed by a gradual increase
of volume.

diffusion in a crystalline solid of a lower melting point, the rate
of diffusion is greater. Diffusion in a noncrystalline material
may occur at a more rapid rate and often may be evident at
room or body temperature. The disordered structure enables the
molecules or atoms to diffuse more rapidly with less activation
energy. Both mercury and gallium are liquid at room temperature because of their melting points at –38.36 °C (–7.05 °F)
and 29.78 °C (85.60 °F), respectively. When either liquid metal
is mixed with a suitable metal alloy, atoms in the alloy dissolve
and diffuse rapidly within the liquid metal at intraoral temperature. The result is a new solid metal compound. This process
has been used in dentistry for making metallic direct restorative
materials (Chapter 8, Amalgam Alloy).

CRITICAL QUESTION
Can you describe metals by their appearance and usage?

Metals
Metals, by their appearance and usage, have several characteristics.
A clean, polished metallic surface exhibits a luster that cannot be
duplicated by other classes of solids. Most metals emit a metallic
sound (“ring”) when they are struck by another metal. They are generally excellent thermal and electrical conductors. Metals are more
resistant to deformation or rupture from external forces and denser
than nonmetallic structures. Most metals are also far more ductile
and malleable than nonmetals, which are generally brittle. The significance of strength, ductility, malleability, and brittleness will be
discussed in the chapter on mechanical properties (Chapter 4). Only

23

a few metals are resistant to tarnish and corrosion in the air at room
temperature.
Pure metals, in common with other elements, can be identified by their specific melting and boiling points and by their basic
physical and chemical properties. Some relevant properties for
metals of dental interest are listed in Table 2-1. Information about
the atom size, crystal structure, and chemical properties of these
elements is provided in Table 2-2. Note that several important elements have more than one crystal structure (polymorphic forms),
depending on the temperature, and have multiple valences.
Of the 118 elements currently listed in the periodic table
(Figure 2-12), about 88 can be classified as metals. One common
feature in the atomic structure of metal elements is that the outermost electrons (valence electrons) around the neutral metallic
atoms are easily given up. This property constitutes the basis of the
metallic bond, where a “cloud” of valence electrons becomes the
“glue” for the positively charged ionic cores made of the nuclei
and the balance of the bound electrons. The bond is nondirectional, allowing the ionic cores to break interatomic bonds with
facility and establish new bonds with other ionic cores at different
positions. This property enables metals to undergo distortion
before fracturing (properties of ductility and malleability) under
mechanical stresses. It should be noted that many metals of
importance for dental alloys are transition elements that have
incomplete inner electron shells.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are pure metals not often used for dental applications?

Pure metals have limited uses in dental and engineering applications because they are too soft to resist deformation from external forces. It has been found that mixtures of two or more metallic
elements or mixtures of one or more metals and nonmetallic elements often result in improved properties beyond what the individual elements can provide. This combination of elements is
called an alloy. An alloy system refers to all possible combinations
(weight percentage or atomic percentage) of elements in the system. Alloys are generally prepared by fusion of the elements above
their melting points. In this book, the term “metal” is used allinclusively to include alloys and pure metals. If the phenomenon
discussed does not apply to both alloys and pure metals, a distinction will be made. The mechanisms for property improvement,
and the effects on physical and chemical properties of alloys, will
be discussed in some detail in Chapter 9.
To make a metal prosthesis, an exact wax or plastic pattern of
the prosthesis is prepared initially. Using a dental investment, an
expanded mold is prepared from the pattern, into which the molten alloy is filled under pressure (Chapter 14, Investing Procedure). When the alloy solidifies, it shrinks to the intended
dimensions. The mechanical properties of the final cast prosthesis
can often be manipulated by regulating the cooling procedure. In
this chapter segment, we will first discuss how a solid emerges
from the molten (liquid) state and the resultant microstructure of
pure metals. We then will discuss the criteria for forming different
types of alloys, the interpretation of phase diagrams, and refinement of the properties of alloys by controlled heating and cooling.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why do dental alloys begin freezing by heterogeneous nucleation rather than
by homogeneous nucleation?

24

PA RT I

TABLE 2-1

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Physical Properties of Elements in Dental Alloys

Element

Symbol

Atomic Weight

Melting Point (°C)

Density (g/cm3)

Thermal Expansion
Coefficient (10−6/K)

Aluminum

Al

26.98

660

2.70

23.6

Carbon

C

12.01

630

2.22

6.0

Chromium

Cr

52.00

271

7.19

6.2

Cobalt

Co

58.93

1495

8.85

13.8

Copper

Cu

63.54

1083

8.96

16.5

Gold

Au

196.97

1063

19.32

14.2

Indium

In

114.82

156

7.31

33.0

Iridium

Ir

192.20

2454

22.50

6.8

Iron

Fe

55.85

1527

7.87

12.3

Magnesium

Mg

24.31

650

1.74

25.2

Mercury

Hg

200.59

−39

13.55

40.0

Molybdenum

Mo

95.94

2619

10.22

4.9

Nickel

Ni

58.71

1453

8.90

13.3

Palladium

Pd

106.40

1552

12.02

11.8

Platinum

Pt

195.09

1769

21.45

8.9

Rhodium

Rh

102.91

1966

12.44

8.3

Silicon

Si

28.09

1410

2.33

7.3

Silver

Ag

107.87

961

10.49

19.7

Tin

Sn

118.69

232

7.30

23.0

Titanium

Ti

47.90

1668

4.51

8.5

Tungsten

W

183.85

3410

19.30

4.6

Zinc

Zn

65.37

420

7.133

0.4

Data from Lyman T, editor: Metals Handbook, vol 1, ed 8, Cleveland, OH, 1964, American Society for Metals.

Solidification and Microstructure of Metals
If a pure metal is melted and cooled to room temperature under
very clean laboratory conditions, a graph of its temperatureversus-time behavior would look similar to that in Figure 2-13.
The temperature decreases steadily from point A to point B′. An
increase in temperature then occurs from point B′ to point B,
at which time the temperature remains constant until the time
indicated at point C is reached. Subsequently, the temperature of
the metal decreases steadily to room temperature (point D). The
temperature, Tf, indicated by the “plateau” portion of the curve at
point BC, is the solidification temperature of the pure metal. This
is also the melting point or fusion temperature.
During the initial cooling, the molten metal remains in the
liquid state to point B′, which is below the solidification temperature; this process is termed supercooling or undercooling. During
the supercooling stage, crystallization of the pure metal begins.
Once the crystals begin to form, the release of latent heat from
liquid changing to solid causes the temperature to rise to Tf, where
it remains until crystallization is completed at point C. Supercooling of pure metals occurs only in clean, inert containers under

circumstances in which heterogeneous nucleation of metal crystals
is not possible.

Nucleus Formation
Solidification of a metal requires nuclei of crystallization. The
liquid state can be imagined as one of a multitude of random
atoms surrounding numerous unstable atomic aggregates or
clusters that are attempting to form crystal nuclei. These temporary nuclei are called embryos. On approaching the solidification temperature, these embryos increase in number and size, but
they are still unstable and tend to dissolve into the liquid matrix.
However, once the supercooled process is completed, there is a
tendency for some of these embryos to survive and thus become
solidification nuclei. This method of nucleus formation is called
homogeneous nucleation, and the formation of nuclei in the molten metal is a random process with equal probability of occurring
at any point in the melt.
Another method of forming stable embryos is for the atoms in
the molten metal to contact some surface, particles in the melt, or
particles in the container. Such a process is known as heterogeneous

CHAPTER 2

TABLE 2-2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

25

Atom Size, Crystal Structure, and Chemical Properties of Elements in Dental Alloys

Element

Symbol

Atom Radius (nm)

Crystal Structure

Oxidation States

Electronegativity

Aluminum

Al

0.118

Face-centered cubic

+3

1.61

Carbon

C

0.067

Hexagonal (graphite)
Diamond cubic (diamond)

+4

2.55

Chromium

Cr

0.166

Body-centered cubic

+2, +3

1.66

Cobalt

Co

0.152

Hexagonal close-packed (≤450 °C)
Face-centered cubic (>450 °C)

+2

1.88

Copper

Cu

0.145

Face-centered cubic

+1, +2

1.9

Gallium

Ga

0.136

Orthorhombic

+3

1.81

Gold

Au

0.174

Face-centered cubic

+1, +3

2.54

Iron

Fe

0.156

Body-centered cubic (≤911 °C)
Face-centered cubic (>911 °C)

+2, +3

1.83

Mercury

Hg

0.171

(Liquid above –39 °C)

+2

2

Molybdenum

Mo

0.190

Body-centered cubic

+6

2.16

Nickel

Ni

0.149

Face-centered cubic

+2, +3

1.91

Platinum

Pt

0.177

Face-centered cubic

+2, +4

2.28

Palladium

Pd

0.169

Face-centered cubic

+2, +4

2.2

Silver

Ag

0.165

Face-centered cubic

+1

1.93

Tin

Sn

0.145

Body-centered tetragonal

+4

1.96

Titanium

Ti

0.176

Hexagonal close-packed (≤880 °C)
Body-centered cubic (>880 °C)

+2, +3, +4

1.54

Zinc

Zn

0.142

Hexagonal close-packed

+2

1.65

Values for atom radius and electronegativity were obtained from http://periodictable.com/.

nucleation because a foreign body “seeded” the nucleus. The distribution of these foreign bodies is not necessarily random. Under
dental casting conditions, heterogeneous nucleation occurs at the
mold wall (investment) or in the molten alloy at impurity particles
or particles of special grain-refining elements.
It should be noted that supercooling is not necessary for heterogeneous nucleation. In fact, heterogeneous nucleation should
account for most of the nucleation that occurs during dental casting. The uniformity of distribution of heterogeneously formed
nuclei is difficult, in principle, to control because the distribution
of the different types of “seeds” is not likely to be uniform.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why might the rates of cooling and solidification affect the grain size of a
dental casting?

Liquid-to-Solid Transformation of Cast Metals
As a liquid metal cools and solidifies, crystals are formed by diffusion
of atoms from the molten metal to existing nuclei of crystallization.
The crystals extend along certain favored crystallographic directions
and form dendrites. The heat released by the solidifying metal (in
extending the arms of dendrites) reduces supercooling around the
arm, which impedes solidification in affected regions and results in
highly elongated extension of the arms. Subsequently, secondary

extension arms of the dendrites branch off the primary arms, and
tertiary arms off the secondary arms, resulting in a three-dimensional
dendritic structure. Dendrites can also grow perpendicular to the
walls of the mold cavity toward the center of the casting. Numerous
dendritic crystals form and grow until they eventually become large
enough to impinge upon each other. Solidification is completed
when the liquid metal in the interdendritic spaces between the dendrite arms freezes to yield crystals. Each crystal within the solidified
metal is called a grain. Thus a grain is a microscopic single crystal
that has a different orientation from that of the adjacent grains. The
interface between adjacent grains is called a grain boundary. The
solidified metal is also called polycrystalline.
The grain boundaries in a solidified metal are revealed when
examining the microstructure of a polished surface that has
been etched. When a highly polished metal surface is subjected
to a chemical or an electrolytic etching solution, the atoms near
grain boundaries are preferentially removed, creating microscopic
grooves that scatter light because these atoms have higher energy
compared with atoms in the interiors of grains. An as-cast dendritic pattern may be present, like the Pd-based alloy shown in
Figure 2-14, or a dendritic microstructure may not exist, such as
for the high-palladium alloy having an equiaxed grain structure
shown in Figure 2-15. The term equiaxed means that the three
dimensions of each grain are similar, in contrast to the elongated
shape and size of the dendrites in Figure 2-14.

26

PA RT I

3

4

5

6

7

18 VIIIA

1

2

Hydrogen

Helium

H
2

Periodic Table

IA

1

1

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

2

IIA

13 IIIA 14 IVA 15 VA 16 VIA 17 VIIA

He

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Lithium

Beryllium

Boron

Carbon

Nitrogen

Oxygen

Fluorine

Neon

Li

Be

B

C

N

O

F

N

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Sodium

Magnesium

Aluminum

Silicon

Phosphorus

Sulfur

Chlorine

Argon

Al

Si

P

S

Cl

Ar

Na Mg 3 IIIB 4

IVB 5

VIIIB
VB 6 VIB 7 VIIB 8

9

10

11

IB 12 IIB

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

Potassium

Calcium

Scandium

Titanium

Vanadium

Chromium

Manganese

Iron

Cobalt

Nickel

Copper

Zinc

Gallium

Germanium

Arsenic

Selenium

Bromine

Krypton

K

Ca

Sc

Ti

V

Cr

Mn Fe

Co

Ni

Cu

Zn

Ga

Ge

As

Se

Br

Kr

42

43

37

38

39

40

41

Rubidium

Strontium

Yttrium

Zirconium

Niobium

Rb

Sr

Y

Zr

Molybdenum Technetium

Nb Mo

Tc

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

Ruthenium

Rhodium

Palladium

Silver

Cadmium

Indium

Tin

Antimony

Tellurium

Iodine

Xenon

Ru

Rh

Pd

Ag

Cd

In

Sn

Sb

Te

I

Xe

55

56

57-71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

Cesium

Barium

Hafnium

Tantalum

Tungsten

Rhenium

Osmium

Iridium

Platinum

Gold

Mercury

Thallium

Lead

Bismuth

Polonium

Astatine

Radon

Cs

Ba

Series of
Lanthanide
Elements

Hf

Ta

W

Re

Os

Ir

Pt

Au Hg

Tl

Pb

Bi

Po

At

Rn

115

116

87

88

89-103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

Francium

Radium

Rutherfor
dium

Dubnium

Seaborgium

Bohrium

Hassium

Meitnerium

Flerovium

Rf

Db

Sg

Bh

Hs

Roentgenium

Nihonium

Ra

Darmstadtium

Copernicium

Fr

Series of
Actinide
Elements

Mt

Cn

Nh

Fl

60

61

Ds

Rg

Moscovium Livermorium

Mc

Lv

117

118

Tennessine

Oganesson

Ts

Og

Series of
Lanthanide
Elements

57

58

59

Lanthanum

Cerium

Praseodymium

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

Samarium

Europium

Gadolinium

Terbium

Dysprosium

Holmium

Erbium

Thulium

Ytterbium

Lutetium

La

Ce

Pr

Nd Pm Sm

Eu

Gd

Tb

Dy Ho

Er

Tm Yb

Lu

Series of
Actinide
Elements

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

Actinium

Thorium

Protactinium

Uranium

Neptunium

Plutonium

Americium

Curium

Berkelium

Californium

Einsteinium

Fermium

Mendelevium

Nobelium

Lawrencium

Ac

Th

Pa

U

Np

Pu Am Cm Bk

Cf

Es

Neodymium Promethium

Fm Md No

Lr

• Figure 2-12 Periodic chart of the elements.
Figure 2-16 is a schematic illustration of the coalescence of
individual grains to form an equiaxed grain structure. Solidification starts from isolated nuclei in the molten metal, and these
crystals gradually grow by the clustering of atoms and extend
toward each other. When the adjacent crystals are eventually in
contact, their growth stops, as shown in Figure 2-16, E. The final
polished and etched microstructure depicting grain boundaries is
shown in Figure 2-16, F. The grain boundary regions are the last
portions of the molten metal to solidify and can serve as sites for
precipitate formation and sinks for impurity atoms.

Temperature

A

Tf

B

C

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the grain size affect the properties of cast dental alloys?

B'

D
Time

• Figure 2-13 A time–temperature cooling curve for a pure metal, illustrating supercooling.

Grain Refinement and Grain Size
In general, the smaller the grain size of the metal, the better are
its physical properties. For example, the yield strength of many
metals has been found to vary inversely with the square root of
the grain size. Consequently, obtaining a small grain size during
casting is an advantage.

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

• Figure 2-14 Optical microscopic image of a polished and etched palladium-based alloy with a dendritic as-cast microstructure. Higher-magnification scanning electron microscope (SEM) images reveal that the complex interdendritic regions can contain a eutectic constituent. (From Carr
AB, Brantley WA: New high-palladium casting alloys: part 1. Overview and
initial studies. Int J Prosthodont 4:265, 1991. Reproduced with permission
from Quintessence Publishing Company, Inc.)

27

• Figure 2-15 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a polished
and etched high-palladium alloy with an equiaxed fine-grain as-cast microstructure. The white-appearing particles are ruthenium-rich and arise from
the use of ruthenium as a grain-refining element. (From Brantley WA, Cai
Z, Foreman DW, et al: X-ray diffraction studies of as-cast high-palladium
alloys. Dent Mater 11:154, 1995. Reproduced with permission.)

A

B

C

D

E

F

• Figure 2-16 Stages in the formation of metallic grains during the solidification of a molten metal.
(Redrawn from Rosenbain W: Physical metallurgy, ed 2, London, 1928, Contable and Co.)

28

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

There are two variables that can reduce the grain size during
solidification: number of nuclei of crystallization and rate of crystallization. A greater number of nuclei will yield a greater number
of grains, and thus the size of each grain is reduced. As pointed
out previously, the formation of nuclei of crystallization can be
increased by the amount of supercooling and the rate of cooling.
If the crystals grow more rapidly than the formation of nuclei of
crystallization, the grains will be larger than if the reverse condition prevails. Conversely, if the formation of nuclei occurs faster
than the growth of crystals, a small grain size will be obtained.
Consequently, slow cooling results in large grains. In other words,
the more rapidly the liquid state can be changed to the solid state,
the smaller or finer the grains will be. Small concentrations of
high-melting-point metals, such as iridium (Ir), ruthenium (Ru),
or rhenium (Re), are generally added as grain-refining elements to
noble metal casting alloys for dental prostheses.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why should a dentist or lab technician consider both the weight percentage
and the atomic percentage of potentially toxic elements when selecting an
alloy for dental prostheses?

Solid Solutions
We often associate a solution with a liquid; therefore the term solid
solution would appear counterintuitive. In chemistry, a solution
refers to a type of homogeneous mixture composed of two or more
substances. That means we could have a solution in the solid, liquid,
or vapor state. The key word is homogeneous. Consider the palladium-silver (Pd-Ag) alloy system, which is relevant for an important
group of metal-ceramic alloys (Chapter 9, Palladium-Silver Alloys),
as an example. When an alloy in this system is solidified, the silver atoms are distributed randomly in the space lattice of the palladium atoms, thereby forming a solid solution. Because the silver
atoms become integrated into the crystal structure of palladium,
no microstructural evidence of a mechanically removable phase
exists because there is only one phase. The term phase in chemistry is defined as a physically distinctive and homogeneous region
of matter. If the binary Pd-Ag alloy appears to be inhomogeneous
as a result of improper cooling, it can be heat-treated at elevated
temperatures for sufficiently long times to promote solid-state diffusion that ensures the uniform distribution of silver atoms in the
palladium lattice.

Solutes and Solvents
In liquid solutions, the substance present in the greater amount
is the solvent, and the substance of the lesser amount uniformly
dispersed in the solvent is the solute. The same principle applies in
solid solutions, where the solute atoms are uniformly dispersed in
the crystal structure of the solvent atoms. There are two principal
atomic arrangements for solid solutions.
The first type is the substitutional solid solution, in which the
atoms of the solute occupy the positions in the crystal structure
that are normally occupied by the solvent atoms in the pure
metal. For a Pd-Ag alloy, the crystal structure of both elements
is FCC, and Ag atoms replace Pd atoms randomly in the crystal
structure of Pd; Ag is the solute, and Pd is the solvent. The second type is the interstitial solid solution, in which the solute metal
atoms are present in random positions (interstices) between the
atoms in the crystal structure of the solvent metal. This type of
solid solution requires that the solute atoms be much smaller in

diameter than the solvent atoms, and these solid solutions are
usually limited to relatively small concentrations of solute. The
family of carbon steels is an example of an interstitial solid solution of carbon in iron. Another example is commercially pure
titanium (CP Ti), an alloy for implants and restorative dentistry
(Chapter 9, Titanium and Titanium Alloys), which consists of
high-purity (≥99 wt%) titanium, with oxygen, carbon, nitrogen,
and hydrogen atoms dissolved interstitially.

Conditions for Solid Solubility
According to the four Hume–Rothery rules discussed in textbooks
on engineering materials science, the conditions that dictate solubility of metals for forming substitutional solid solutions are as
follows:
1. Type of crystal structure—The crystal structure of the solute
and the solvent metals should be identical.
2. Atom size difference—The atomic radii of the solute and solvent atoms must differ no more than 15%; otherwise, multiple phases occur during solidification.
3. Valence—Solid solutions are more likely to occur when the
solvent and solute atoms have the same valence.
4. Electronegativity—Electronegativity is an atom’s tendency to
attract a bonding pair of electrons. Alloys with a greater difference in electronegativity between the solute and solvent atoms
tend to form intermetallic compounds rather than solid solutions. Intermetallic compound refers to a substance composed of
definite proportions of two or more elemental metals, like AuCu
and AuCu3 in the Au-Cu alloy system to be discussed later.
According to Table 2-2, the difference between the atomic
diameters for Ag and Sn is approximately 4%. However, these two
metals differ in valence and have different crystal structures, so
there is limited solid solubility for Sn in Ag. As the Sn content
increases, an intermetallic compound (Ag3Sn) forms, which is an
important phase in the starting powder for preparing dental amalgams (Chapter 8, Amalgamation).
For an interstitial solid solution, the solute metal atoms must be
smaller than the size of the interstitial spaces in the solvent metal
lattice, and the solute and solvent atoms must have similar electronegativity to avoid the formation of intermetallic compounds.
Mechanical Properties of Solid Solutions
Substituting solute atoms of different sizes in the solvent lattice
causes localized distortion, which is known to improve the
mechanical properties of alloys, such as greater force or pressure
needed to cause deformation of the material. For example,
although pure gold in the cast condition is too soft for restorations, adding only 5 wt% of copper will provide adequate strength
and hardness to the Au-Cu alloy that are sufficient for the casting
to be used for small inlays. Mechanisms of strengthening metals
through alloying will be discussed later in this chapter and in
Chapter 9, Dislocation Movement in Polycrystalline Alloys.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is the study of binary phase diagrams important, even though
dental alloys contain more than three elements and the conditions during
solidification and cooling after casting are far removed from equilibrium?

Equilibrium-Phase Diagrams
A phase diagram shows conditions (pressure, temperature, volume, etc.) at which thermodynamically distinct phases occur

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

29

P
1500

Liquid
R

1400
N
Temperature (°C)

1300

S

Y

T

M
W

B
D

1200
1100
1000
A
900
800
0% Pd 10
100% Ag

Solid
O
20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90 100% Pd
0% Ag

Composition (wt% Pd)

• Figure 2-17 Equilibrium-phase diagram for the palladium-silver system showing percentages by weight.
Only the percentage composition for palladium is given; the percentage composition for silver is determined by subtracting the palladium composition from 100.

and coexist at equilibrium. The phase diagrams in this book are
temperature–composition graphs showing the boundaries of phase
transformation in two-element alloy systems under atmospheric
pressure. For three-component alloy systems, a three-dimensional
(3-D) phase diagram is needed to include the third element but
would be much more complex. (Two-dimensional portrayals of
important ternary phase diagrams for three-component alloy systems are provided in engineering reference texts.) Nevertheless,
binary phase diagrams are useful for understanding the structure
of alloys. Figure 2-17 presents the phase diagram for the solid
solution Pd-Ag system. These two elements exhibit complete solubility in both liquid and solid states. Note the liquid, liquid-plussolid (L + S), and solid regions separated by the liquidus (upper)
and solidus (lower) curves. The liquidus is the boundary between
the liquid and (L + S) regions, and the solidus is the boundary
between the (L + S) and solid regions.

Interpretation of a Solid-Solution Phase Diagram
The dashed line PO in Figure 2-17 represents cooling of a liquid
metal containing 65% Pd and 35% Ag from 1500 °C (point P) to
800 °C (point O). At approximately 1400 °C, line PO intersects
the liquidus at point R, where solidification begins. We can draw a
parallel line through point R that intersects the solidus at point M.
The line RM is called a tie line. The meaning of the tie line is that
the initial solid phase that forms at that temperature should have
the composition of point M, 77% Pd, when projected to the horizontal (composition) axis; the composition of the liquid remains
essentially the same because only a very small amount of solid has
precipitated.
When the temperature decreases to point S (∼1370 °C), the
new compositions of the solid and liquid phase may be determined by the tie line YW, a parallel line drawn through point S
intersecting the liquidus at point Y and the solidus at point W.

Projecting points Y and W to the horizontal axis shows that the
solid formed is 71% Pd and the remaining liquid phase is 57%
Pd. When the vertical cooling line intersects with the solidus at
point T (∼1340 °C), the tie line NT shows that if there is any liquid left at this temperature, the remaining liquid should have the
composition of 52% Pd (point N). Most if not all of the liquid has
converted to solid with 65% Pd (point T). When the temperature
decreases below point T, the alloy is entirely solid, with a composition of 65% palladium.
It should be reemphasized that the phase diagram describes
the equilibrium state of the alloy for the different compositions–
temperature conditions. The cooling process would have to be
held at each of the foregoing temperatures for a prolonged time
sufficient for atomic diffusion to enable the approach to equilibrium conditions for both the liquid and solid phases.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does solidification of metal alloys from fluid state always yield a solid with
inhomogeneous microstructure?

Coring and Homogenization Heat Treatment
In practice, cooling of a casting does not allow phases in the alloy
to reach equilibrium at each temperature before solidification is
completed. For example, the first stable nucleus that forms at the
temperature point R (or slightly below) in Figure 2-17 is richer
than 65% Pd. As the solidification continues with temperature
decreasing, the Pd content in the liquid decreases so that each succeeding “layer” that solidifies on this nucleus will have reduced Pd
content and increased Ag content than the previous layer. Before
reaching the solidus temperature (point T) in Figure 2-17, the
composition (point N) of the remaining liquid to solidify between
the outermost layers of the adjacent solid particles would have

30

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Ag richer than 35%. The solid particles (dendrites or grains) have
what is termed a cored structure, with the composition varying
from the center (containing more Pd) to the outer surface (containing less Pd). Thus the central portion of each particle contains
larger amounts of the component with the higher solidification
temperature (Pd), and the outer portions contain larger amounts
of the component with the lower solidification temperature (Ag).
It follows, because more atomic diffusion would be required to
achieve near-equilibrium compositions, that the larger the temperature range between liquidus and solidus, the greater is the
tendency toward coring.
A cored structure represents an inhomogeneous microstructure,
making alloys more prone to tarnish and corrosion (Chapter 3,
Heterogeneous Surface Composition). For Pd-Ag alloys, it is
necessary to have Pd dispersed uniformly for providing tarnish
and corrosion resistance in the oral environment (which causes
silver to tarnish). Alloys with heterogeneous microstructures have
greater resistance to permanent deformation than alloys with
homogeneous microstructures, as discussed in Chapter 9, Dislocation Movement in Polycrystalline Alloys. The ductility of an alloy
that is single phase under equilibrium conditions increases after
a homogenization heat treatment that eliminates nonequilibrium
secondary phases.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the advantages and disadvantages of eutectic alloys? How do the
alloy compositions of binary eutectic systems affect their properties?

Eutectic Alloys
When the two metals in a binary system have the same crystal
structure but limited mutual solid solubility, the phase diagram
may include two solid solutions, one rich in the first metal and one
rich in the second metal. Figure 2-18 shows a phase diagram for
the Ag-Cu system and a schematic microstructure of each phase.
Three phases can be observed: a liquid phase (L), a silver-rich substitutional solid-solution phase (α) containing a small percentage
of copper atoms, and a copper-rich substitutional solid-solution
1100
1000

a

b

c

phase (β) containing a small percentage of silver atoms. The solidus curve is the boundary line ABEFD, and the liquidus curve is
AED. In the α + β region (CBEFG), both solid solutions exist.
Note that the alloy composition represented by point E has the
lowest melting point of the alloy system. The composition of
point E is known as the eutectic composition, 28% Cu and 72%
Ag, for the Ag-Cu alloy system. Because point E is also on the
solidus curve, the eutectic composition should solidify completely
at a single temperature (the eutectic temperature) that is referred
to as an invariant point.

Phase Changes of Eutectic Alloys
The Ag-Cu phase diagram (Figure 2-18, A) represents a typical
binary eutectic phase diagram and is used in the following discussion of the phase changes that can occur during cooling. Line
ABC (termed a solvus line) shows the solid solubility of Cu in
silver for the α solid solution as the temperature changes; this solid
solubility reaches a maximum at point B (∼9% at 780 °C). Solvus
line DFG shows that the solid solubility of Ag in Cu reaches a
maximum at point F (∼8% at 780 °C) but has a very low value at
300 °C (point G).
The eutectic liquid composition solidifies at a single temperature to a solid phase comprising two phases (α and β). A lamellar
structure with alternating layers of the α and β phases typically
forms, such as shown in Figure 2-18, B, because a minimal
amount of diffusion is required to produce the needed segregation
of the two different atom species.
Figure 2-18, B illustrates phase-transformation equilibrium
cooling of five different alloy compositions in the Ag-Cu system. For the molten 5% Cu alloy (line a), cooling to the (L + α)
region causes precipitation of α crystals within the liquid. Further
cooling past line AB results in complete solidification of the alloy
to α solid solution. As the alloy is cooled further, the solubility
limit at line BC forces precipitation of β solid solution within α,
typically at grain boundaries or interdendritic regions. There is
no eutectic microstructure for this alloy composition because the
cooling (vertical dashed line) does not cross the eutectic isotherm
line (line BEF). When the cooling of a liquid-phase (line b) alloy
containing 12% Cu crosses points AE, crystals of α emerge in the

d D

Liquid

Liquid

A

Temperature (°C)

900

α solid
solution

L +α

800

L+ β

E

a

a

a, b

c, d

d

d

β solid
solution

F

B

700
600

Solid
(α + β)

500

β precipitates in
α solid solution
(α+β)

b
α in liquid
(L+α)

E

c
β in liquid
(L+β)

α precipitates in
β solid solution
(α+β)

400
300 C
0% Cu
100% Ag

A

G

20

40

60

Composition (wt% Cu)

80

100% Cu
0% Ag

B

α crystals in
eutectic structure
(α+β)

100%
eutectic structure
(α+β)

• Figure 2-18 Equilibrium-phase diagram of a eutectic alloy. A, Silver-copper system showing percentages by weight. B, Diagram of all possible phase transformations in the silver-copper system. Note that
the ratio of phases is not to the scale of the composition.

β crystals in
eutectic structure
(α+β)

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

liquid. When this alloy cools past line BEF, the remaining liquid
forms a lamellar eutectic structure around existing α crystals. The
amount of the eutectic constituent in the microstructure of the
solid alloy depends on how close the alloy composition is to the
eutectic composition. For the alloy containing 80% Cu (line c),
the changes in composition during cooling are similar as in line
b, except that now the first solid to form as crystals in the liquid
phase is the β solid solution. At a temperature below points BEF,
this alloy will have β crystals surrounded by the lamellar eutectic
structure. For the molten 94% Cu alloy (line d), the sequence of
phase transformation is the same as in line a, except that it forms
β solid solution instead.

Physical Properties and Application of Eutectic Alloys
Alloys that contain the eutectic constituent in their microstructures are relatively brittle, whereas alloys with microstructures
lacking the eutectic constituent are ductile. Alloy embrittlement
occurs because the alternating lamellae of the α and β phases
inhibit the movement of dislocations, which increases strength
and hardness but decreases ductility. The tarnish resistance of
these alloys without the eutectic constituent is superior to that of
the alloys containing this constituent.
Eutectic alloys have several important applications in dentistry
because they correspond to a composition with the lowest melting point in an alloy system. They can be used as filler metals in
the processes of brazing or soldering (Chapter 9, Joining of Dental
Alloys). The Ag-Cu eutectic composition is also used to produce
spherical particles that are combined with Ag3Sn lathe-cut particles
to be reacted with mercury to form a dispersed-phase dental amalgam (Chapter 8, Composition).

Peritectic Alloys
Like the eutectic transformation, the peritectic reaction is an
invariant reaction that occurs at a particular composition and
temperature. Figure 2-19 is the phase diagram for the Ag-Pt alloy
system, which is useful for instructional purposes, although there
is no Ag-Pt dental alloy. The pure metals Ag and Pt have the
FCC structure. Rather than the difference in atomic radii, the
dominant factor is the considerably greater difference in melting temperature for Ag and Pt compared with Ag and Cu. The α
phase in the Ag-Pt system is silver-rich, the β phase is platinumrich, and the two-phase (α + β) region results from the limited
solid solubility of less than approximately 12% Ag in Pt at 700
°C (point F). Figure 2-19 also shows that the equilibrium solid
solubility of Pt in Ag is approximately 56% at 700 °C (point
G). The peritectic transformation occurs at point P (alloy II),
where the liquid (composition at point B) and the platinum-rich
β phase (composition at point D) transform into the platinumrich α phase (composition at point P). For a composition, such
as exists for alloy I, cooling through the peritectic temperature
results in the transformation of the liquid and β phase (L + β)
to the α phase, with some of the liquid phase remaining (L + α).
For both of these transformations, the α phase forms at the interface between the liquid and β phase. Because extensive diffusion
is required in these phases for the transformation to occur, peritectic alloys are highly susceptible to coring during rapid cooling.
This cored structure has inferior corrosion resistance and is more
brittle than the homogeneous solid-solution phase. The peritectic
reaction in the Ag-Sn system is of great importance for the alloy
that reacts with mercury to form dental amalgam for restorations,
as discussed in Chapter 8, The Silver-Tin System.

31

1900
A

Liquid (L)
1700

Temperature (°C)

CHAPTER 2

I

II

1500

1300
B

P

L+

D

α+
1100

900

L+
H
G

700
0% Pt
100% Ag

20

40
60
80
Composition (wt% Pt)

F
100% Pt
0% Ag

• Figure 2-19 Equilibrium-phase diagram of the platinum-silver system
showing percentages by weight.

Solid-State Reactions in High-Noble and Noble
Alloy Systems
The strength and hardness in some metal alloys may be manipulated by the presence or absence of uniformly dispersed fine particles or certain phases within the original matrix phase. The
process can be achieved via a solid-state reaction (i.e., a controlled
heating and cooling protocol, also called heat treatment) without
changing the configuration of the object. The best-known example is the ordering of Au-Cu alloys.

CRITICAL QUESTION
By which two mechanisms does copper provide strengthening and hardening
of gold casting alloys?

Gold-Copper System
Figure 2-20 presents the Au-Cu phase diagram, where both
weight and atomic percentages are shown. The melting range
between the solid and liquid phases is narrow for all compositions, and the liquidus and solidus curves meet at 80.1 wt%
Au. At the lower half of the diagram, there are two arch-shaped
regions. One arch spans the composition range between 40 and
65 wt% Au and peaks at 390 °C with 50.8 wt% Au (α′). The
atomic ratio of Au to Cu at the peak is 1:3, indicating the formation of the intermetallic compound AuCu3 in this region. The
second arch spans the composition range between 65 and 85
wt% Au and peaks at 410 °C with 75.6 wt% Au (α2′′). The
atomic ratio of Au to Cu at this peak is 1:1, indicating the formation of intermetallic compound AuCu in this region. The α
solid solution that forms when the alloys initially solidify has a
disordered structure in which the Au and Cu atoms randomly
occupy the lattice sites (Figure 2-21, A).The AuCu and AuCu3
phases have new crystal structures that differ from the parent
FCC α solid solutions of Au and Cu atoms that form when the
alloys initially solidify at elevated temperatures below the solidus
curve (Figure 2-21, B & C). These phases in the regions under

32

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Atomic percentage gold
0
1100

10

20

30

40

50

60

70 80 90

1084.5°
1064.43°

1050
L
1000

Temperature (°C)

950

911°, 80.1%

900
(Cu, Au)
450

410°, 75.6%
390°, 50.8%

400

385°

2

350

300
285°
1

250

200

240°

Cu

10

20

Donald T. Hawkins

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Au

Weight percentage gold

• Figure 2-20 Equilibrium-phase diagram for the gold-copper system. (The temperature range between
450 and 900 °C has been condensed.) (With permission from Metals handbook, ed 8, vol 8, Metals Park,
OH, 1973, American Society for Metals, p 267.)

Gold
Copper
Gold or

A
B
C
Copper
• Figure 2-21 Structure of Au-Cu alloy. A, Disordered substitutional solid solution. B, Superlattice of
AuCu3. C, Superlattice of AuCu.

the two arches are called ordered because the Au and Cu atoms
occupy specific locations in the lattices.
Because the crystal structure of the ordered phase (termed a
superlattice) differs from that of the gold α solid solution, each
region of the ordered phase is surrounded by a localized elastic
strain field, which is necessary to maintain the continuity of
atomic bonds across the interface between the ordered phase and
the matrix α phase. As a result, it requires greater strength to cause
plastic deformation of the alloys (Chapter 9, Dislocation Movement in Polycrystalline Alloys).

Rapid cooling of a molten gold alloy in a room-temperature
water bath or an ice-water bath (also known as quenching) does not
allow sufficient time for atomic diffusion to form the ordered structure. The disordered solid solution is retained at room temperature,
and the gold alloy is relatively soft and ductile. Bench cooling of the
same gold alloy through the temperature range of ordered phase formation allows enough atomic diffusion for partial transformation
to an ordered structure that provides the additional and strength.
Clinically, a type 3 or 4 gold alloy casting can be quenched after
initial solidification to retain a soft disordered structure, which

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

allows easier adjustment of the casting, such as the margin, and then
reheated to a specific temperature within the ordered-phase region
(e.g., 400 °C) for a period of time as recommended by the manufacturer and quenched to yield the stronger and harder ordered alloy.
This process is called age-hardening heat treatment.
To reverse the hardened type 3 or 4 gold alloy castings to their
softened condition, the casting is heated to a temperature below
the solidus temperature (e.g., 700 °C), holding for approximately
10 minutes to convert the alloy to the disordered substitutional
solid solution, and then quenched to retain the disordered phase.
The process is called a solution heat treatment.
It should be noted that the quenched, softened condition for
types 3 and 4 gold alloys is metastable, and slow increases in hardness and strength will occur with time under room-temperature or
intraoral conditions as a result of low-temperature ordering.

Other Noble Alloys for Dental Applications
Dental gold casting alloys may contain solute metals (Cu, Pd, and
Pt), which provide solid-solution strengthening, along with minor
amounts (<1%) of Zn or Ir forming precipitates, leading to age
hardening. Because commercial dental alloys contain multiple elements, interactions between solute atom species have the potential
to influence microstructures and mechanical properties. Because of
elemental microsegregation during rapid solidification and cooling,
phases may be observed in cast dental alloys that would not occur
under equilibrium conditions for the same alloy compositions. Furthermore, the compositions of phases in multicomponent alloys will
generally be more complex than in binary alloys. In principle, under
equilibrium conditions, each phase in an alloy will contain some
amount (which may be minuscule) of each component element.
It is important to note another effective age-hardening mechanism in gold alloys: formation of the FePt3 intermetallic compound, which provides strengthening of the original high-gold
alloys for metal-ceramic prostheses (Chapter 9, Au-Pt-Pd Alloys).

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are there substantial differences between the microstructures and
strengthening mechanisms for the high-palladium alloys and the palladiumsilver alloys?

Palladium-Based Alloys
Palladium-based alloys are very important for ceramic applications (Chapter 9, High Noble and Noble Alloys). The high-palladium alloys are based on the Pd-Ga system, in which there is an
eutectic composition at the high-palladium-content side of the
phase diagram, and complex precipitation reactions potentially
occur at lower temperatures. For Pd-Cu-Ga alloys, both the rapid
cooling rate during solidification and the addition of copper shift
the Pd-Ga eutectic composition to higher percentages of palladium that result in the formation of a Pd2Ga eutectic phase in the
cast microstructure. Both Pd-Cu-Ga alloys and the Pd-Ga alloys
have a fine submicron “tweed” structure that can be observed
by transmission electron microscopy. This structure appears to
form by a martensitic phase transformation in the FCC structure
of the palladium solid-solution matrix and remains stable during the firing cycles for dental porcelain. Strengthening of these
alloys occurs by the solid-solution mechanism and by the formation of Pd5Ga2 precipitates in some Pd-Cu-Ga alloy compositions. In contrast, the Pd-Ag alloys are based on the binary alloy
system discussed earlier in this chapter and have much simpler
microstructures than the high-palladium alloys, with secondary

33

phases forming in the Pd solid-solution matrix because of the
solute atoms in the alloy compositions. Heat treatment of these
alloys can cause microstructural changes that significantly affect
mechanical properties.

Multicomponent Dental Alloy Systems
Various age-hardening mechanisms have been employed (often
empirically) by alloy manufacturers, and these may vary depending on the alloy composition. There are many possible ternary
alloys, quaternary alloys, and higher-order multicomponent alloy
systems that can be used for restorative dentistry. Such systems
are complex, and the phase-diagram data available are extremely
limited. Thus binary phase diagrams are often used to estimate the
effect of individual elements on the phases formed, along with the
resulting microstructures of these cast alloys. However, such equilibrium diagrams should be interpreted carefully because actual
casting and cooling processes reflect nonequilibrium conditions.

Ceramics
Ceramics are solid-phase compounds of metallic and nonmetallic
elements. Recall that the valence electrons of metallic atoms can be
transferred to nonmetallic atoms or groups of atoms with outer shells
that are nearly complete with electrons to form stable compounds
by ionic bonds, and that nonmetallic atoms may also share electrons
to form another kind of compound by covalent bonding. Both scenarios deprive compounds of free electrons, thus making them poor
conductors of heat and electrical current. Even though they comprise
metallic elements but lack characteristics of metal substance, ceramics are considered nonmetallic, inorganic structures.
In the search for the ideal restorative material, dental ceramics have become attractive because of their biocompatibility,
long-term color stability, chemical durability, wear resistance,
and ability to be formed into precise shapes, although in some
cases, ceramics require costly processing equipment and specialized training for lab technicians. In this segment, we will discuss
the general structure of ceramics and how the structure affects the
mechanical properties of ceramics. Further information on the
structure, properties, benefits, and drawbacks of specific ceramic
materials used for crown and bridge prostheses will be provided,
along with recent developments in dental ceramics.

Structure of Ceramics
Like metals, ceramics have 3-D crystalline structures, but they
are much more complicated than those of metals because they
need to accommodate different kinds of atoms, maintain electric
charge neutrality within the unit cell, and achieve high packing efficiency. Normally, the metallic elements lose their original
crystalline structure and adopt a new one. Consider magnesium
oxide (MgO), a significant ingredient in investment materials
(Chapter 14, Phosphate-Bonded Investment) and modern dental
ceramics (Chapter 10, Ceramic-Ceramic or All-Ceramic Systems);
Mg in metallic crystal has a hexagonal structure (Figure 2-9, F), and
the structure of MgO, which is the same as NaCl (Figure 2-7, B),
shows that anions O2– (large orange spheres) retain an FCC structure, whereas Mg2+ ions (small blue spheres) are in the interstitial
locations because they are smaller in size. Current dental ceramics
are based on silicate ([SiO4]4– tetrahedron), alumina (Al2O3), and
zirconia (ZrO2).
Soda–lime glass is a silicate-based material commonly used for
windowpanes, glass containers (bottles and jars), and artworks.

34

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

1

2
3

4

1

2

5

-

+

-

+

-

+

-

+

-

+

+

-

+

-

+

-

+

-

+

-

A 3 4 5
B
• Figure 2-22 Comparison of slip. A, Monoatomic metals of Au. B, Biatomic ceramic of MgO; Mg is
shown by the blue spheres, and oxygen is shown by the gray spheres. More force is required to displace
atoms because of attraction between different atoms and repulsion between similar atoms.

It is manufactured by melting raw materials, which are silica,
soda, lime, and a small quantity of varieties of metallic oxides.
It has all the ingredients needed to form crystalline structures,
but the composition used in soda–lime glass yields short-range,
repetitive-order structures. Therefore, ceramic materials with a
short-range repetitive order of their structural units are usually
called glasses or glassy phase, which are also transparent to the
light. Glassy phases of ceramic melt at lower temperature. They
play an important role in the fabrication of ceramic-based prostheses (Chapter 10, Metal-Ceramic Systems).
The complexity of crystalline and the strong bonds holding
the atoms together make the solid-state reactions of ceramic sluggish. At a normal cooling rate, the ceramic does not have enough
time to arrange itself into the complicated crystalline structure
it could achieve. We, nonetheless, can subject these materials to
a heat treatment like that of Au-Cu system by nucleation and
growth of crystals in the glass-matrix phase. This type of material
is used in dentistry to balance the translucency and opacity of the
prostheses. They are called glass-ceramics (Chapter 10, CeramicCeramic or All-Ceramic Systems).
Most metal-forming operations depend on the casting of
molten metal and/or mechanical forming of the metal. These
operations are rarely used in ceramic-forming operations because
of the high melting point and almost extreme brittleness (no
ductility) of ceramics. We will learn in Chapter 10, History of
Dental Ceramics, that fabricating dental ceramics into prosthetic shapes and configurations is conducted through one of
the three categories of processes: sintering, hot isostatic pressing, and computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing
(CAD-CAM) (see also Chapter 15, Prototyping Tools). A prosthesis is first sculpted out of dental ceramic powder with the
help of a binder, which is followed by a heating process called
sintering. During sintering, the packed ceramic particles are densified and agglomerate to the intended form. Primary bonding
occurs between the particles by liquid-phase sintering with a
glassy phase, or solid-state sintering. The preparation of hot isostatic pressing is like metal casting, except that dental ceramic is
not melted but softened enough to be pressed into a mold with
a cavity of the shape of the prosthesis. CAD-CAM comprises all
processes that require the use of a computer to control the making of prostheses. Each of the three structures of the ceramics
discussed earlier can be formulated to facilitate each of the three
fabrication processes.

Mechanical Properties of Ceramics
Most ceramic materials are described as brittle; that is, they are
incapable of large deformations without fracture. Let us examine
the deformation of a metal (Au) and a ceramic (MgO) in terms

of atoms’ movement between two rows of atoms (Figure 2-22) in
response to a pair of forces pushing the top row right and bottom
row left. In the case of metal, every atom in the top row must break
a metallic bond with one atom and reconnect with another one
in the bottom row. For example, atom 2 breaks a metallic bond
with atom 3, and then reconnects with atom 5. The coordination
arrangement is the same as before (Figure 2-22, A). This kind of
movement is called slip, and the interphase where it occurs is called
a slip plane. In the case of ceramic, which consists of Mg2+ and O2–
ions, a similar movement necessitates the breaking of strong ionic
bonds, like the gold atoms need to break metallic bonds. Before the
ions complete the transition to restore the original atomic arrangements, they must overcome the high-energy positive–positive and
negative–negative repulsion forces when they encounter ions of the
same charge (Figure 2-22, B). The entire process requires a tremendous expenditure of energy. This requirement restricts the mechanism of slip in ceramic materials.
Thus slip restriction makes ceramic materials brittle and more
resistant to fracture under compression but not under tension. In
practice, defects such as pores within the bulk and cracks on the
surface are often introduced during processing, production, and
handling. These irregularities produce stress concentrations in a
material (Chapter 4, Stress Concentration). For ductile materials,
such as gold, the stress concentration can be relieved by atomic
slippage. For brittle materials, the stress concentration cannot be
relieved and can easily exceed the tensile strength of the materials,
causing fracture. Under compression, defects like cracks do not
accentuate the stress. Thus, ceramic materials are much stronger in
compression than in tension. The role of defects in the longevity
of ceramic-based prostheses and means of minimizing the impact
of these defects are discussed in Chapter 10, Minimizing the Effect
of Stress Concentrations.

Polymers
Polymers are a class of natural or synthetic substances composed of
very high-molecular-weight molecules with repeating units, called
macromolecules. For synthetic polymers, each repeating unit is
called mer in the polymer and a monomer before becoming part
of the macromolecule by a chemical reaction called polymerization. The main chain of a macromolecule is called the backbone.
Generally, resin is a solid or highly viscous substance of plant or
synthetic origin that is typically convertible into polymers. For our
purpose, resins are compositions of either monomers or macromolecules blended with other components to provide a material,
after polymerization, with a useful set of properties.
Synthetic resins polymerize randomly from activated local
sites. Thus, depending on the ability of the chains to grow from
their local activation sites, the molecular chains that form within

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

a polymeric material will vary in length, shape, and structure.
Although the primary bonds are holding the atoms within a
polymer chain, there are secondary bonds and/or hydrogen
bonds between polymer chains. In addition, polymer chains
often become entangled, adding complexity to the structure. As
a result, many physical and mechanical properties are determined
largely by intermolecular forces. In this section, we will discuss
the nature of polymers, their physical and mechanical properties,
and polymerization. Restorative, bonding, and prosthodontic
applications of polymers are discussed in Chapters 5, 6, and 11,
respectively.

Fundamental Nature of Polymers
Polymerization is a repetitive intermolecular chain-growth reaction that can proceed almost indefinitely, sometimes reaching
molecular weights as high as 50 million. The two most significant
features of polymers are very large molecules and virtually limitless
chain configurations and conformations.

35

more growing chains (Figure 2-24). Because of the interlinking
of many chain backbones, a highly crosslinked polymeric material can consist of just a few giant molecules or even a single
giant molecule.

Copolymer Structures
Polymers that have only one type of repeating unit (mer) are
homopolymers; those with two or more types of mer units are
known as copolymers. There are three different types of copolymers by the arrangement of repeating units:
• Random copolymer—No sequential order exists among the
two or more mer units along the polymer chain.
AAAAAABBBBBAAAABBBBBBAAAAABB
• Block copolymer—Identical monomer units occur in relatively
long sequences (blocks) along the main polymer chain.
AAAAAABBBBBAAAABBBBBBAAAAABBB

Molecular Weight
Because of the various length of chains in the polymer, a method
of expressing an “average” molecular weight of a heterogeneous
polymer is needed for the overall molecular
− weight of polymers.
The number average molecular weight (M n) is the total weight of
a polymer divided by the overall number of molecules present in
the material. The number of molecules can be obtained by measuring the osmotic pressure−of the polymer solution. The weight
average molecular weight (M w), which can be obtained by light
scattering of the same polymer solution, is the sum of molecular
weight of polymer chains multiplied their respective weight fraction. The International System (SI) unit for the molecular weight
of polymers is the same as that of nonpolymer compounds; it is g/
mol and is also known as Dalton (Da).
−
−
Considering the concepts just discussed, the ratio (M w)/(M n)
(called the polydispersity) of a polymer is a measure of the range
and
− distribution of chain sizes. Polymers with an equal value of
(M w) but different values of polydispersity will exhibit somewhat
different properties. For example, polymers of higher polydispersity will begin to melt at a lower temperature and have a larger
temperature range of melting.
Chain Branching and Crosslinking
It is possible for a growing polymer chain to branch and lose its
linear form (Figure 2-23). Branching is analogous to extra arms
growing out of a backbone polymer chain; thus the probability
of entangled chains increases. When a monomer has more than
one site for growing a chain, it can chemically connect two or

Linear

Branched

• Figure 2-24 A crosslinked structure is formed by copolymerization,
where at least one comonomer is multifunctional. Here, methylmethacrylate is copolymerized with ethylene glycol dimethacrylate.

Crosslinked

• Figure 2-23 Schematic diagrams of linear, branched, and crosslinked polymers.

36

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

• Graft or branched copolymer—Sequences of one type of
mer unit (B) are “grafted” onto a backbone chain of a second
(A) type of mer unit to form a branched configuration (see
Figure 2-23).
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B

Molecular Organization
In most polymers, the chains are coiled and entangled in a very
random pattern known as an amorphous structure (Figure 2-25,
left). In others, the chains align themselves to form a highly ordered
region, like that of crystalline structures (Figure 2-25, right). Most
polymeric materials combine these two forms of organization in
greater or lesser proportions. Characteristically, the dental polymers are predominantly amorphous, with little or no crystallinity.
The polymer chains form a tangled mass, analogous to cooked
spaghetti, in which each spaghetti string is a mile or so long. Such
polymer segments have little chance to migrate and are immobile
in the solid state.
However, many linear polymers have regions of long-range
ordering that produce a degree of crystallinity depending on the
secondary bonds that can be formed, the structure of the polymer
chain, the degree of ordering, and the molecular weight. Polymer crystallinity usually increases strength, rigidity, hardness, and
melting temperature but at the price of reduced ductility—that is,
increased brittleness. Factors that reduce or prevent crystallinity
and increase amorphous character include the following:
• Copolymer formation, which inhibits polymer chain alignment
• Polymer-chain branching, which also interferes with chain
alignment
• Random arrangement of substituent groups, particularly large
side groups that keep polymer chains separated.

Physical and Mechanical Properties of Polymers
The performance of polymers depends on the interaction between
polymer chains and their response to external stimuli. These properties can be grouped into four interrelated categories: mechanical, rheometric, dissolution, and thermal.

Mechanical Properties—Deformation and Recovery
In the absence of crosslinking, only relatively weak interpolymerchain bonds (van der Waals and hydrogen bonds) are available to
hold the polymer chains together in a solid state. Chain slippage
decreases as chain length increases because the bonds between
chains, together with chain entanglements, resist dislodgment
of the individual chains. At a certain chain length, the resistance
provided by interchain bonds and entanglements becomes strong
enough to exceed the covalent bond strength of the carbon–carbon bonds along the backbone chains. At this critical chain length,
an applied force can rupture chains rather than dislodge them and
cause one chain to slide past another. This balance between the
strength of the interchain bonds and the covalent bonds along
the backbone chains explains why the physical and mechanical
properties of polymers increase with increased molecular weight
up to a certain point. Subsequently, increased molecular weight
becomes less important.
Although dependent on its type, a resin generally develops
mechanical strength only when its degree of polymerization is relatively high, in the range of approximately 150 to 200 recurring mer
units. Above this molecular weight, there is very little increase in
strength with further polymerization. Likewise, the molecular-weight
distribution of the polymer plays an important role in determining
physical properties. In general, a narrow distribution of molecular
weight yields the most useful balance among required properties.
Long side chains extending from the main backbone chain
(i.e., chain branching) generally produce a weaker resin with a
lower softening temperature in comparison with linear-chain
(nonbranched) polymers. This weakening occurs because the side
chains act to separate the main chains, thus reducing the chainto-chain attractive forces. This is the plasticizing effect discussed
further in the following section on solvation. However, if the side

• Figure 2-25 Schematic diagram of polymers that contain only amorphous intermolecular and intramolecular organization (left) and combinations of both amorphous and crystalline regions (shaded areas on right).

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

chains can react with adjacent chains to form a crosslinked polymer, the strength of the polymer is increased.

Rheometric Properties
The rheometry, or flow behavior, of solid polymers involves a combination of elastic and plastic deformation, followed by elastic
recovery after the stresses are eliminated. The chain length, number of crosslinks, temperature, and rate of force application (fast
impact versus slow extension) determine which type of behavior
dominates. A force applied to polymers for an extended period
causes the material to undergo all of the following deformations:
elastic strain, plastic strain, and viscoelastic strain.
1. Elastic strain is reversible deformation and will be quickly and
completely recovered when the force is eliminated, as the result
of polymer chains uncoiling, and then recoiling (Figure 2-26).
2. Plastic strain is irreversible deformation that cannot be recovered and results in a new, permanent shape as a result of slippage among polymer chains (Figure 2-27).
3. Viscoelastic strain is a combination of elastic and plastic deformation mentioned in 1 and 2. The elastic portion of the
viscoelastic strain will recover when the force is removed,
but the recovery takes time to complete because the elastic
recovery process is impeded by the viscous flow resistance
among chains. The amount of deformation that is not recovered over time is the plastic deformation.
Solvation and Dissolution Properties
When a polymer is immersed in a liquid solvent, it can absorb the
solvent, swell, soften, and may even dissolve in the solvent. If the
polymer–solvent interactions are higher than the polymer–polymer
attraction forces, the polymer chain segment starts to absorb solvent
molecules, increase the volume of the polymer matrix, and become
solvated in the solvent. It, however, is a slow process. The longer
the chains extend, the more slowly the polymer dissolves. Crosslinking provides enough bridges between linear chains to form a
3-D network that decreases solvent sorption, making the polymer
nonsoluble. Elastomer, a rubber-like material that is lightly crosslinked, can swell more easily and to a greater extent than do plastics
but does not dissolve. Crystalline regions having higher polymer–
polymer interaction act as physical crosslinks, reducing swelling and
solubility. Chain branching should increase solubility.
The ability to absorb lower-molecular-weight compounds
makes it possible to modify the properties of polymers by a process

called plasticization. Low-molecular-weight compounds, known
as plasticizers, are often added to resins to lower their softening
or melting/fusion temperatures, making a resin that is normally
hard and stiff at room temperature, flexible, and soft. For example, polyvinylchloride (PVC) pipe is hard and rigid, whereas PVC
water-line tubing is soft and elastic and contains a very high level of
plasticizer. In recent years, certain plasticizers, particularly phthalates, have received public attention as a potential ingestion hazard
in the soft plastics used in infants’ and children’s toys.
A plasticizer acts to partially neutralize the secondary bonds or
intermolecular attractions that normally prevent the resin chains
from slipping past one another (i.e., undergoing plastic flow) when
the material is stressed. In some cases, this action is analogous to
that of a solvent, with the plasticizing agent penetrating between
the chains and increasing the intermolecular spacing. This type of
plasticizer is referred to as an external plasticizer because it is not a
part of the host polymer structure. Its molecular attraction to the
host polymer should be high to minimize volatilization or leachout during the fabrication or subsequent use of the resin.
Plasticizing can also be accomplished by copolymerization with
a suitable comonomer. In this case, the plasticizing agent becomes
part of the polymer and acts as an internal plasticizer. For example,
when butyl methacrylate is added to methylmethacrylate before
polymerization, the polymerized resin is plasticized internally by
the bulky butyl-methacrylate segment. The pendant butyl-methacrylate groups occupy extra space between chains and increase
intermolecular spacing, which enhances plastic flow. Plasticizers
usually reduce the strength, hardness, and softening temperature
of the resin. For example, both types of plasticizers are used to
help form soft, cushioning liners for dentures.

Thermal Properties
Polymers can be reshaped into many configurations, depending
on whether the polymeric material is a “thermoset” or a “thermoplastic.” Thermoplastic polymers soften when heated above
Tg, the temperature where secondary bonds weaken, and the resin
softens and becomes ductile or rubbery (Figure 2-28). Above the
Tg, the resin can then be shaped and molded and, upon cooling, retains the new configuration. This process can be repeated
almost indefinitely. Thermoplastic resins are made of linear and/
or branched chains. Without crosslinking, covalent bonds holding
chains together, a polymer can soften (and eventually melt) above
Tg and is usually soluble in organic solvents.

Loading
continued

Loaded

Stretching only

Unloaded

No additional stretching

Full recovery

• Figure 2-26 Elastic recovery: spring-like behavior (rapid and reversible). Chains uncoil, but they do
not slip past one another because of crystalline regions, entanglements, or crosslinks. Thus they recoil
completely when unloaded.

Loaded

Unloaded

Stretching only

Loading
continues

37

Slipping occurrs
(Quantity of slippage depends
on the duration of loading)

Partial recovery with
permanent deformation

• Figure 2-27 Viscoelastic recovery: chains stretch and uncoil and also slip past one another, producing
plastic, irreversible, permanent distortion, and partial recovery when unloaded.

38

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

In contrast, thermoset polymers are formed by heating a precursor mixture, which initiates polymerization, and the ensuing
chemical changes render it rigid after cooling. Resins are crosslinked in this state, and thus, they are insoluble and will not melt
when heated beyond their glass-transition temperature but instead
become rubbery (Figure 2-28). In this manner, the chains are rendered more flexible when heated, and the crosslinks prevent chain
slippage and reshaping. Thermoset resins decompose if heated to a
high enough temperature.
If two otherwise-similar linear polymers are compared, the
one with the higher molecular weight will also have a higher
Tg. This is because as the length of the linear-polymer chain is
increased, the number of bond sites increases along that chain.

Thermalplastc amorphous

Glassy
State

Stiffness/Modulus (MPa)

In addition, the longer length of the chain increases the chance
for
− chain entanglements. The number average molecular weight
(M n) is indicative of both Tg and the strength of the polymer. As
the temperature increases, thermally induced rotations and vibrations among polymer segments increase. This molecular motion
forces chains apart, breaks bonds, increases thermal expansion,
and facilitates chain disentanglement. These factors, in turn,
induce chain slippage and explain the thermoplastic behavior of a
resin when the temperature exceeds Tg. As the degree of crosslinking increases, slippage is progressively reduced, and the material
becomes progressively more resistant to thermal softening.
Figure 2-29 illustrates the effect of the size and configuration of
pendant groups on the Tg of poly(methacrylate) ester compounds.
The figure shows that Tg decreases from 125 °C for the shorter
methyl group to 33 °C for the longer n-butyl group. The isomer
of respective groups, because of compact configuration, results in
a smaller reduction of Tg.

Chemistry of Polymerization

Glass
Transition
State

Traditionally, there are two classes of polymers as determined by
the polymerization mechanism: addition and condensation
polymers. Addition polymers contain the same atoms as the
monomer in their repeating units, whereas condensation polymers contain fewer atoms because of the formation of by-products during the process. Emphasis, however, has changed to
classify polymerization as to whether the process occurs between
the functional groups of polymer chains in steps or by propagating of a growing chain by taking in monomers sequentially.
Condensation polymers usually are formed by a stepwise intermolecular reaction of reactive functional groups of monomers
with multiple functional groups, also known as step-growth
polymerization. Addition polymers occur by propagation from
active growing chains where monomers are sequentially added
to one end of the chain, also known as chain-growth polymerization. Note that the classification by growth mechanism disregards the existence of by-products; therefore, step-growth
polymerization does not always produce by-product, and chaingrowth polymerization can yield by-products, depending on the
monomers involved.

Tg
Thermoset
Rubbery
State

Rubbery
Flow
Viscous Flow

Temperature (K)
• Figure 2-28 Effect of temperature on the stiffness of amorphous thermoplastic and thermoset polymers. Both materials exhibit glass-transition
and rubbery states. The structure of thermoplastic polymer turns rubbery,
and then viscous liquid, whereas thermoset polymer remains rubbery, and
then burns. An amorphous polymer takes on characteristic glassy-state
properties, such as brittleness, stiffness, and rigidity.

Tg

R
Methyl

CH 3

CH 2 CH 3

65 °C

n-Propyl

CH 2 CH 2 CH 3

38 °C

n-Butyl

CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3

33 °C

Ethyl

O

iso Propyl

O

iso-Butyl

m

Polymethacrylate esters

125 °C
120 °C

Phenyl

CH2

R

CH 3

sec-Butyl

CH 3
CH
CH 3
CH 3
C CH 3
C H3
CH 3
CH 2 C H
CH2 CH 3

95 °C

70 °C

62 °C

• Figure 2-29 Influence of pendant group on the glass-transition temperature of polymethacrylate esters.
R represents ester radicals.

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the stages of activation and free radical initiation and curing? Which
three activation processes are used for dental polymers?

Addition Polymerization (Chain-Growth Polymerization)
For addition polymerization to occur, monomers must contain
an unsaturated bond, which may exist in a double carbon-tocarbon bond or in a ring structure, as shown in Figure 2-30.
Carbon–carbon double-bond units are known as vinyl groups
and are most often exemplified in dentistry by methacrylate
monomers (H2C = CR–COOCH3). Ring-opening monomers are
represented by imine rings found in polyether impression materials (Chapter 13, Polyether) and by epoxy rings found in siloranebased restorative resins (Chapter 5, Low-Shrinkage Monomers).
An initiator is also needed to start chain-growth polymerization.
The initiator could be a free radical, that is, a substance containing
one unpaired electron but that carries no net charge for polymerizing vinyl base monomers (R•), or an ionic compound that carries
charges but maintains electrical neutrality as a catalyst for polymerization of monomers comprising rings. Stages of addition polymerization by free radicals are discussed in the following section, using
methyl methacrylates, a vinyl monomer, as the model materials.
The process occurs rapidly, almost instantaneously, and the reactions are exothermic, with considerable heat evolved.
Stages in Addition Polymerization of Vinyl Monomers
There are four stages in the addition polymerization chain reaction: induction, propagation, termination, and chain transfer.
Induction

The induction stage comprises two processes: generation of free
radicals (activation) and initiation of polymerization. Benzoyl

O
R CH

CH2

• Figure 2-30 Unsaturated functional groups for chain-growth polymerization: vinyl (left) and epoxy ring (right).

O

O

O

O

2
O

O

• Figure 2-31 Activation (heat or chemical) of benzoyl peroxide (BPO).
During activation, the bond between the two oxygen atoms indicated by
the hollow arrow is broken, and the electron pair is split between the two
fragments. The dot adjacent to the oxygen atom symbolizes the unpaired
electron of the free radical.

O
O

A

+ H2C

peroxide, which is commonly used in dental resins, can be activated
rapidly between 50 and 100 °C or by a second compound, such as
amine, to release free radicals (Figure 2-31). The third method is
light-activated initiation, which allows control of polymerization
with precision by varying light intensity. The latter has become the
preferred method of curing resin-based composites (Figure 5-5).
The stage of curing remains the same regardless of the method
of activation. Induction is the period during which initiator
molecules become energized and break down into free radicals,
followed by these radicals reacting with monomer molecules to
initiate chain growth (Figure 2-32). This period is greatly influenced by the purity of the monomer. Any impurities present that
are able to react with activated groups can increase the length of
this period by consuming the activated initiator molecules. However, the higher the temperature, the more rapid is the formation of
free radicals, and consequently, the shorter is the induction period.
When a free radical approaches a monomer with a high-electron-density double bond, an electron is extracted, and it pairs
with the R• electron to form a bond between the radical and the
monomer molecule, leaving the other electron of the double bond
unpaired. Thus the original free radical bonds to one side of the
monomer molecule and forms a new free radical site at the growing end of the chain (Figure 2-32).
Propagation

The resulting free radical–monomer complex then acts as a new
free radical center when it approaches another monomer to form
a dimer, which also becomes a free radical. This reactive species, in
turn, can add successively to a large number of methyl-methacrylate
molecules so that the polymerization process continues through the
propagation of the reactive center. Propagation reactions are further illustrated in Figure 2-33. Because little energy is required once
chain growth begins, the process continues with the evolution of
heat and leads to large polymer molecules within seconds.
Termination

H
C
H

R
C
H

39

CH3
O
O
CH3

Initiation

O
O

B

H
C
H

The chain reactions should continue until all the monomer has
been converted to polymer chains. However, there is a strong
tendency of growing radicals to react and cause termination of
chain growth. The probability increases as the monomer concentration decreases. The termination step can occur in two ways:
coupling and disproportionation. Coupling is by a direct combination of two free radical chain ends that deactivates the radicals
with the formation of a covalent bond (Figure 2-34). Disproportionation involves the transfer of a hydrogen atom from one growing chain to another (Figure 2-35). The free radical donates the
hydrogen and becomes unsaturated, while the other one receives
the hydrogen and becomes saturated. Therefore there are always
unsaturated functional groups remaining in resin-based composite restorations (Chapter 5, Degree of Conversion) and denture
bases (Chapter 11, Polymerization Cycle).

CH3
O

O
O
CH3

O

C

H
C
H

CH3
O

O
O
CH3

O

D

• Figure 2-32 Initiation of a methylmethacrylate molecule by free radical. As the unpaired electron of the
free radical approaches the methylmethacrylate molecule (A and B), one of the electrons in the double
bond is attracted to the free radical to form an electron pair and a covalent bond between the free radical
and the monomer molecule (C and D). When this occurs, the remaining unpaired electron makes the new
molecule a free radical (D).

H
C
H

CH3
O
O
CH3

40

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

m
CH3

CH3
O CH2
O

+ HC

CH3
CH3
CH2
O CH3
O Chain Growth
O
O
O
O
CH3
CH3

Propagation

2

O
O
CH3

O
O
CH3

CH3
O CH2
O

O
O
CH 3

CH3

CH3
CH2
O
O
CH3

CH2

m

O
O
CH3

• Figure 2-33 Propagation and chain growth. As the initiated molecule approaches other methylmethacrylate molecules, the free electron interacts with the double bond of the methylmethacrylate molecule and
incorporates the molecule to the growing chain, a new, longer free radical is formed.

CH3

CH3

O CH2

CH2

O +

O

O

O
CH3

O
CH3

m

CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
O
O
O
O
CH3
CH3

O
O

n

Termination by coupling
CH3
CH3 CH3
CH2
CH2
O
O
O
O
O
O
CH3
CH3 CH3

CH3
O CH2

O

O

O

CH2

O
CH3

m

O

n

• Figure 2-34 Termination occurs when two free radicals interact and are joined together by a covalent
bond (hollow arrow) but lose their reactivities.

CH3
O CH2
O

CH3
CH2

O
O
CH3

m

O +

O
CH3

CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
O
O
O
O
CH3
CH3

O
O

n

Termination by disproportionation
CH3
O CH2
O

CH3
CH
O +

O
O
CH3

H

m

O
CH3

CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
O
O
O
O
CH3
CH3

O
O

n

• Figure 2-35 Disproportionation occurs when two growing free radicals approach each other; one radical becomes an unsaturated end group (left) after it donates a hydrogen atom to the other free radical,
which becomes a saturated molecule (right). The end group that becomes saturated is the passivated
segment of the polymer chain.
Chain Transfer

The process of chain transfer involves transferring the reactivity
of a radical to another species, along with the termination of the
donating radical. The example in Figure 2-36 shows a monomer
being activated without the initiator (benzoyl peroxide, BPO).
Because the terminated chain gained an unsaturated functional
group, it could be reactivated by another chain transfer and continue to grow again.

Inhibition of Addition Polymerization
The polymerization reactions are not likely to result in a complete exhaustion of the monomer, nor do they always form polymers of high molecular weight. Impurities in the monomer often

inhibit such reactions. An impurity can react with the activated
initiator or with an activated growing chain and prevent further
growth. Although the presence of inhibitors markedly influences
the degree of polymerization, the mechanism has been used in
resin-based dental materials.
Addition of methyl ether of hydroquinone, a common inhibitor, in the amount of 0.006% or less, inhibits the spontaneous
polymerization of dental resins during storage. The inhibitor
neutralizes any free radical as it is formed before it initiates chain
growth. Therefore all hydroquinone should be eliminated before
polymerization by chain propagation can occur. Thus the inhibitor not only prevents premature polymerization during storage
but also provides adequate working time in the case of two-part
(self-cure) systems.

CH3
O CH2

CH2
O

O

O
CH3

m

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

CH3

CH3

O +

H2C
O
O
CH3

O
CH3

Chain Transfer
CH3

CH3

O CH2
O

O
O
CH3

CH

m

O +
O
CH3

CH3
H3C
O
O
CH3

• Figure 2-36 Chain transfer occurs when a free radical approaches a methylmethacrylate molecule and donates a hydrogen atom to
the methylmethacrylate molecule. This causes the free radical rearrangement to form a double bond and become unreactive, and the
methylmethacrylate monomer becomes a free radical without benzoyl
peroxide (BPO). The deactivated chain resulting from this exchange
can become an active growing chain by a chain transfer from another
free radical.

Oxygen reacts readily with the growing chains and results in
a radical of low reactivity that does not attract monomers and
thus inhibits chain growth. Oxygen inhibition mostly affects
the surface exposed to ambient air and produces a greasy film of
unpolymerized resin on newly placed sealants and resin-based
restorations. The oxygen-inhibited layer generally is unfavorable but can be beneficial in building up a light-cured composite restoration. When new composite is placed over the
oxygen-inhibited surface and light-cured, the once-inhibited
resin is now shielded from oxygen and exposed to fresh free
radicals activated by the light curing. The process promotes
bonding between layers of composites. Drawbacks with oxygen
inhibition are the higher release of poorly cured material to the
adjacent tissues, softer resin (composite) surfaces that are more
susceptible to wear and discoloration, and a weaker bond to
a tooth surface if the material shrinks away from the oxygeninhibited layer during curing.
A common clinical practice is to use a matrix material, which
helps to shape the resin and acts as a barrier to prevent contact
with oxygen during curing. Such a matrix strip prevents a sticky,
air-inhibited layer from forming on the surface.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What mechanisms are responsible for the inhibition of polymerization? What
are the benefits of inhibitors in dental resins? What role does O2 play as an
inhibitor?

Step-Growth Polymerization (Condensation
Polymerization)
The reactions that produce step-growth polymerization can progress by any chemical reaction that joins two or more molecules
to produce a simple nonmacromolecular structure. The primary
compounds react, often with the formation of by-products such
as water, alcohols, halogen acids, and ammonia. The formation
of these by-products is the reason step-growth polymerization
is often called condensation polymerization. This step-growth

41

mechanism is the one used exclusively in biological tissues to
produce proteins, carbohydrates, deoxyribonucleic acid, and
ribonucleic acid.
In step-growth polymerization, a linear chain of repeating mer
units is obtained by the stepwise intermolecular condensation or
the addition of the reactive groups in which bifunctional or trifunctional monomers are all simultaneously active, as opposed to
the activation of one monomer at a time of a growing chain in
chain-growth addition polymerization. There are two approaches
to form condensation polymers: one having both reactive functional groups in one molecule and the other having two types of
difunctional monomers. The following example is for the polymerization of one type of diol.
HO  (silicone)  OH  nHO  (silicone)  OH 
H  (O  silicone) n+1  OH  nH2 O.
(1)
Very often a catalyst is needed to accelerate the reaction, and
the resultant molecular weight increases as the duration of the
reaction increases. If a monofunctional impurity is present, the
reaction will limit the growth of the polymer chain by rendering
a chain end inactive.
There are two more examples related to stepwise polymerization in Chapter 13. In one, water is removed in the process of
joining one type of monomer (trimercaptan) to form a polysulfide rubber with an oxidizing agent (Figure 13-2); in the other
case, ethanol is removed in the process of joining siloxane molecules to form silicone rubber involving two types of monomers
(Figure 13-3).
The formation of polymers by step growth is comparatively
slow because the reaction proceeds in a stepwise fashion from
monomer to dimer to trimer, and so forth, until large polymer
molecules containing many mer units are eventually formed.
Such a polymerization process tends to stop when the chains have
grown to certain sizes that are less mobile and with few functional
groups left to react.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the practical benefits of using copolymer resins for dental
applications?

Copolymerization
Resin-based materials used in dentistry that require polymerization at chairside or in the laboratory usually comprise more than
one type of monomer. In many of the polymerization reactions
described previously, the macromolecule is formed by the polymerization of a single type of structural unit. However, two or more
chemically different monomers, each with some desirable property, can be combined to yield specific physical properties of a
polymer. As defined earlier, the polymer formed is a copolymer,
and the process of formation is known as copolymerization.

Composite Materials
A composite is a material made of two or more constituent components with significantly different physical or chemical properties that, when combined, produce a material with characteristics
different from the individual components. Most importantly, the
combination is designed to achieve specific functional properties.
The individual components remain separate and distinct within

42

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

the finished structure, differentiating composites from mixtures
and solid solutions. In modern materials engineering, composites
usually consist of one or more discontinuous phases embedded
within a continuous phase.

Microstructure of Composite
The discontinuous phase is usually harder and stronger than
the continuous phase and is called the reinforcement or reinforcing material, whereas the continuous phase is named the matrix
or binder. Each class of materials discussed so far can be either
the matrix or the reinforcement phase of a composite, or both
phases of the composite. The reinforcement phase, which is discontinuous, can be in the form of particles, short fibers in random
directions, unidirectional long fibers, woven fabrics, laminates, or
honeycomb. The reinforcement phase of the composite materials
used in dentistry is mostly glass or ceramic particles and some
short fibers. Often the term filler is used to represent the reinforcement phase of the particles and short fibers.

Benefit of Composite Structure
The most cited benefits of adding harder, stronger, or tougher fillers to a matrix are the improvement in the stiffness, strength, or
toughness of the resulting materials. By the rule of mixtures, the
final properties of the material will be between those of the two
constituent materials. Strength enhancement alone would not necessarily satisfy the clinician’s need at chairside. Clinicians need to
prepare materials at chairside, adapt them to the tooth structure,
shape them while they are still soft, and then allow the material
to set to the hardened stage capable of withstanding the occlusal
load (Chapter 1, Challenges of Dental Materials in the Oral Cavity). The most noted composite used in modern dentistry is resinbased composite made of a polymeric resin matrix embedded with
glass or ceramic particles (Chapter 5, History of Composites). The
matrix phase alone can be fluid enough to adapt to tooth surfaces
and set to a solid. The addition of filler particles to the matrix can
increase the viscosity of the mixture, providing the bulk for shaping the matrix phase and rendering much-needed strength. Filler
particles, on their own, would have no ability to form a firm solid,
but with the help of the matrix phase, fillers can form a useful solid
structure. In dentistry, the term composite has been used exclusively
for resin-based composite materials.

Composite Materials Used in Dentistry
In addition to resin-based composites, the following chapters show
that most dental materials, if examined in detail, are composed of
dissimilar subunits as in composites. For example, aqueous dental
cements are the result of reactive filler particles mixed with an acid
solution. The product of reaction becomes a continuous phase, and
unreacted particulates are the discontinuous phase (Chapter 7, History of Dental Cements). Dental amalgam is the result of the partial
dissolution of alloy particles in mercury, where new mercury-rich
phases emerge as the matrix holding the unreacted portion of the
alloy particles together (Chapter 8, Amalgamation). Multiphase
metal alloy can have precipitates dispersed in the microstructure. Keep in mind that metal alloys are not treated as composites, but they do possess structures of a composite nature. Dental
porcelain consists of a glassy matrix and a ceramic filler particle
phase for strengthening purposes (Chapter 10, Crystalline Particle
Strengthening). Denture-base resins incorporate polymer beads in

the monomer to make the mixture easily workable for processing.
Those beads dissolve partially, and the remaining portion is dispersed within the polymerized matrix (Chapter 11, Acrylic Resins).
Impression materials have a wide range of filler contents facilitating
the specific requirements of impression making (Chapter 13, Chemistry of Elastomeric Impression Materials). Various allotropic forms
of silica (SiO2) are incorporated in investment material for metal
casting to induce fracture resistance at elevated temperatures and
provide thermal expansion of the mold during heating to compensate for metal casting shrinkage (Chapter 14, Investment Materials).
For abrasive instruments, hard abrasive grits use resin (or rubber),
metal, and glass (or ceramic) as the binder to make instruments
for various surface-reduction and finishing processes (Chapter 16,
Design of Abrasive Instruments). Not all composite materials mentioned are made with strengthening in mind but, rather, to fulfill
other goals, such as the ability to manipulate the material. Nonetheless, adjusting the filler phase to improve the strength of the final
material has been done in some of those materials.

Factors Influencing Properties of Composites
The properties of particle-filled resin composites are influenced by
three major factors: component properties, filler content by volume, and interfacial interaction between filler and matrix. The
matrix phase is characterized by the stiffness and the fillers by particle size, size distribution, specific surface area, and particle shape.
The strength of the composite increases with the filler-volume fraction, up to a limit. Both factors are discussed in Chapter 5, Composition and Function. Interfacial interaction can considerably affect
properties. For the filler in the resin composite to be effective, a
good bonding between the filler and the matrix is essential to enable
the matrix to transfer the load to the filler to resist fracture. This
means that the filler becomes an integral part of the matrix phase.
Recall from the section on types of bonds that both primary
and secondary bonds hold materials together. These bonds occur
within the same material; for example, metallic bonds form within
metals after melting of metal components and solidification.
Ceramic powders are packed together and sintered into a solid
object. Solid polymer blends can be made by melting two thermoplastics together and solidifying. How do the fillers bond to the
matrix? In dental amalgam, there is a chemical reaction between
the mercury and metal alloys, where the bonding between filler and
matrix is likely the primary bond. It is the same with the aqueousbased dental cements.
For the other materials, the matrix is usually a resinous fluid
phase before solidifying, and there is often no chemical reaction between the two components. There must be some sort of
interaction between the liquid and the solid keeping them together
after the liquid phase solidifies. In the next section, the interactions between the solid surface and the liquid phase in holding
these materials together are examined.

Adhesion and Bonding
So far, we have been exploring the attraction between atoms and
molecules in the formulation of metals, ceramics, polymers, and
composites. It is the formulation of composites that tests our understanding of bonding. Although we do not expect to observe a similar
attraction between two nonmagnetized solid objects, we do notice
that two solids can adhere to each other with or without the help of
a third substance or device. As examples, an artificial denture stays
attached to the soft tissue when saliva is present, plaque adherence to

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

tooth structure facilitates the formation of calculus, and a transmucosal abutment is fixed to the implant root by a screw (Figure 2-37).
The first two examples involve bonding at the molecular scale, and
the last one, the implant root, is first retained by mechanical means,
followed by osseointegration (Chapter 12, Implant Attachment
Mechanism). Some dental materials are bonded to the hard tissue to
replace the missing part of the tooth structure and restore its functions. Therefore an understanding of the fundamental principles
associated with bonding is important to the dentist.
When the molecules of one substrate adhere or are attracted to
molecules of the other substrate, the force of attraction is called
adhesion when unlike molecules are attracted, and it is called
cohesion when the molecules involved are of the same kind. The
material that is used to cause adhesion or bonding is known as
the adhesive, and the material to which the adhesive is applied
is called the adherend. In a broad sense, bonding is simply a

surface-attachment process, which is usually qualified by specifying the type of intermolecular attraction that may exist between
the adhesive and the adherend. The application of these concepts
is discussed in Chapter 6, Mechanisms of Adhesion.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is the potential energy of the atoms on the surface higher than those
within the bulk of the material?

Surface, Surface Energy, and Surface Tension
A surface is defined as the outermost atomic or molecular layer of a
material. Consider the space lattice of a solid shown in Figure 2-38, A.
Inside the lattice, all the atoms are equally attracted to each other.
The interatomic attraction for interior atom “1” has a balanced

Buccal
mucosa

Surface
tension

A

B
C
• Figure 2-37 Examples of solid adhering to solid in dentistry. A, Retention of denture base; saliva fills
in the space between the denture and soft tissue, providing retention through capillary attraction (Figure
2-38). The space between the denture and the soft tissue is exaggerated to show the capillary attraction.
B, Plaque formation on the enamel surface, which converts to calculus by calcification. C, The implant
root is first retained by the bone mechanically, followed by osseointegration for long-term implant stability.
(Courtesy Dr. Inchan Ko.)
Surface atom or
molecule (2)
Interior atom or
molecule (1)
2

A

43

1

B
• Figure 2-38 Comparison of atom (or molecule) under the surface with atom (or molecule) on the surface. Each sphere represents an atom or a molecule. A, As a solid, a bond balance exists around the
interior atom (1), and the exposed atom (2) on the surface is free to develop bonds to atoms or molecules
approaching the surface. B, As a liquid, the interior molecule (1) is in equilibrium with neighboring molecules, whereas molecule (2) is in equilibrium with molecules along the surface but experiences a pulling
force to the interior of the liquid mass.

44

PA RT I

TABLE 2-3

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Surface Energy of Selected Materials

Solids

Surface Energy (mJ/m2)

Liquids

Enamel1

92

Water5

Dentin

1

87

2

20

Teflon

Gold alloy

3

51–54

3

Surface Energy (mJ/m2)
72.8 @25°C
5

486 @25°C

Mercury
6

53 @37°C

Saliva

7

Dentin bonding agent

34–55

48

Ni-Cr

3

Commercial pure titanium
4

Acrylic denture resins

50
46–54

Note: Depending on the measuring methods and the materials used, the values obtained are likely to be different among studies. The table is intended to give readers a general idea of surface energies
of selected materials.
1
Weerkamp AH, Uyen HM, Busscher HJ: Effect of zeta potential and surface energy on bacterial adhesion to uncoated and saliva-coated human enamel and dentin. J Dent Res 67:1483–1487, 1988.
2
Jań czuk B, Białopiotrowicz T, Zdziennicka A: Some remarks on the components of the liquid surface free energy. J Colloid Interf Sci 211:96–103, 1999.
3
Sardin S, Morrier JJ, Benay G, Barsotti O: In vitro streptococcal adherence on prosthetic and implant materials. Interactions with physicochemical surface properties. J Oral Rehab 31:140–148, 2004
4
Sipahi C, Anil N, Bayramli E: The effect of acquired salivary pellicle on the surface free energy and wettability of different denture base materials. J Dent 29:197–204, 2001.
5
Haynes WM, Lide DR, editors: Handbook of chemistry and physics, ed 91, Boca Raton, FL, 2011, CRC Press, pp 6–127.
6
Glantz PO: The surface tension of saliva. Odontol Rev 21:119–127, 1970.
7
Gonçalves M, Pécora JD, Vinha D, Silva RS: Surface tension of different dentin bonding resin systems. Braz Dent J 8:43–47, 1997.

array of neighbors surrounding it, and the potential energy is
at a minimum. At the surface of the lattice, surface atom “2” is
not equally attracted in all directions, and its potential energy is
greater. This potential energy can be demonstrated by the behavior
of a small drop of water placed on a clean glass slide. The water
droplet spreads out and remains stationary when the glass slide is
tilted or turned upside down. This means that the water molecules
are attracted to the glass surface. This phenomenon of attraction
can be explained by the potential energy discussed in Figure 2-2.
The potential energy present is known as surface energy with the
unit of mJ/m2. Surface energy is also treated as the work required
to generate a new surface.
In the case of a liquid, the molecules, which are shown as
spheres in Figure 2-38, B, on the surface are pulled inward by the
imbalanced forces generated by the unequal attraction on the surface. One good example is falling raindrops taking spherical shapes,
which have the smallest surface area per volume of all known
shapes. The sphere arrangement allows more molecules surrounded
by their fellows (molecule “2” in Figure 2-38, B), while the molecules on the surface are constantly under tension. The reality is that
the cohesive attraction between liquid molecules on the surface is
the force keeping the surface to a minimum. This force is known
as surface tension, which is often expressed as an amount of force
exerted uniformly on a line of molecules of unit length along the
surface. The most common unit is mN/m (millinewton per meter).
The terms surface energy and surface tension are often used
interchangeably because the values of the two parameters are the
same. Nonetheless, one should be aware that surface tension is
used to define fluid surfaces, whereas surface energy is often used
to define solid surfaces but is also applicable for liquids. Generally,
the greater the cohesive force between atoms and molecules, the
greater the surface energy of the surface. Table 2-3 lists the surface
energy of selected solids and liquids.
Surfaces with a high surface energy are attractive to molecules
of lower surface energy, such as hydrocarbons. Molecules in the
air may be attracted to and become adsorbed on the material surface. Initially, the attraction between them is secondary bonding

(van der Waals force). As the distance between the molecules
from the air and the surface diminishes, primary bonding may
occur. Silver, platinum, and gold adsorb oxygen readily. Neither
gold nor platinum forms stable oxides at room temperature;
therefore the bond between oxygen and metals (gold and platinum) remains secondary. In the case of silver, silver oxide may
form as oxygen becomes bonded to silver by covalent bonding.
This process is called chemisorption and is limited to the monolayer of oxide present on the surface. Both phenomena constitute
an adhesion process, where oxygen is the adhesive and metals are
the adherents. Keep in mind that after interaction with oxygen,
these surfaces are not pure metallic surfaces anymore in terms of
surface bonding.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What conditions are necessary to achieve the strongest level of bonding?

Wetting
When two impurity-free glass slides are placed one on top of
another and pressed together, they exhibit no tendency to adhere.
Regardless of how smooth these glass surfaces may appear to be,
they are likely to be rough on an atomic or molecular scale. Consequently, when they are placed in apposition, only the “hills” or
high spots are in contact. Even if primary or secondary bonding
occurs at these points of contact, these areas usually constitute
only an insignificant portion of the total surface, and no perceptible adhesion takes place. In addition, no attraction is expected
when the surface molecules of the attracting substances are separated by distances greater than 0.7 nm.
The examples of adhesives bonding to solid surfaces given earlier involved either gas or liquid. It is obvious that gas and liquid
can adapt to a solid surface by flowing into surface irregularities
to provide contact over a greater part of the surface of the solid.
When a drop of water is introduced between two glass slides before
they are pressed together, considerable difficulty is encountered

CHAPTER 2

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

45

P

d

P=

2 L cos
d

P

• Figure 2-39 Two glass plates and water film. The liquid (water) between the two plates spreads because of good wetting. The attraction between the water molecule and glass surface is greater than the
cohesive force between water molecules. Therefore, as water molecules spread, they also pull the two
glass slides closer. Small arrows show the vector of surface tension, and broad arrows show the force that
pulls the slides closer. The surface tension of water is about 72.8 mN/m. For a space of 1 μm, the stress
acting on the slide will be 140 kN/m2 (0.14 MPa). You will learn in Chapter 4 that the value is relatively low.
Therefore, if the glass slides cannot be separated by pure tension, it is likely that the water film (d) is only
nanometers in thickness.

in pulling the two slides apart (Figure 2-39). This is a result of
the capillary action from intermolecular attractive forces between
water and the glass plates.
To produce adhesion on any targeted surface, the liquid (adhesive) must spread and flow easily over the entire surface and attract
to the solid. This characteristic is known as wetting. If the liquid
beads up on the surface of the adherend, adhesion between the liquid and the adherend will be negligible or nonexistent. The ability
to wet the substrate is the dominating contributor to the adhesive
bond when the adhesive sets from liquid to solid.
The ability of an adhesive to wet the surface of the adherend
is influenced by several factors. The cleanliness of the surface is of
importance. Impurities on the solid surface often yield a surface
of lower energy than the clean surface and prevent wetting by the
adhesive, such as epoxy glue. A surface’s surface energy can be so
low, such as that of dental wax or Teflon, that it cannot be wet satisfactorily by most dental adhesives. Impurity-free metal surfaces,
on the other hand, because of their high surface energy, interact
vigorously with liquid adhesives.
In general, the comparatively low surface energies of organic
and inorganic liquids permit them to spread freely on solids of
high surface energy. This means the attraction between a liquid
and a solid surface is greater than the cohesive forces of the liquids.
This is a prerequisite of good wetting and strong adhesive joints.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does wetting increase (higher wettability) if the adhesive attraction at
the liquid/solid interface is greater than the cohesive attraction of the liquid
molecules?

Contact Angle of Wetting
How can we tell if a liquid wets a solid satisfactorily for bonding,
especially when the surface to be bonded is covered by that very
liquid? When we place one drop of water each on a clean glass
slide, an acrylic plate, and a sheet of Teflon, we observe that the
water drop spreads to the edge of the glass slide and to a lesser
extent on the acrylic plate but appears to bead up on the Teflon
surface. If we observe at the level of the solid substrate, we will see
the symmetrical profile of the former water drop resting on a flat
surface (Figure 2-40). Both ends of the profile depict where three
phases—vapor (air), liquid (water), and solid (glass, acrylic, or Teflon)—converge. We can draw a tangent relative to the curvature

of the liquid profile from the vapor/liquid interface. The tangent
line and the solid surface constitute an angle that defines the shape
of the liquid; this is called the contact angle.
If the force of attraction between molecules of the adhesive and
molecules of the substrate is stronger than the cohesive attraction
(surface tension) between the molecules of the adhesive, the liquid
adhesive will spread much more broadly over the solid surface and
result in a smaller contact angle (Figure 2-40, A). Thus a small
contact angle indicates that the adhesive forces at the interface
are stronger than the cohesive forces holding the molecules of the
adhesive together. If the adhesive beads up (Figure 2-40, C), the
force of adhesion is weaker than the cohesive force of the adhesive. Because the tendency for the liquid to spread increases as the
contact angle decreases, the contact angle is a useful indicator of
spreadability or wettability (Figure 2-40, D). Complete wetting
occurs at a contact angle of 0°, and no wetting occurs at an angle
of 180°. Thus the smaller the contact angles between an adhesive
and an adherend, the better the ability of the adhesive to flow into
and fill in irregularities within the surface of the adherend. The
fluidity of the adhesive influences the extent to which these voids
or irregularities are filled.
If oil drops or liquids other than water have been used instead,
the observed contact angle will be different. Therefore it is important to know the identity of the liquid that has been used to determine the contact angles. If none is identified in the literature, it is
likely that distilled water has been used.
The profile of the liquid on a flat surface shows that there are
three distinct interfaces, vapor/liquid, liquid/solid, and solid/vapor,
and each interface is characterized by an interfacial energy, γVL, γLS,
and γSV, respectively. At equilibrium, the interfacial energies among
the three phases along x-axis should follow Young’s equation,
shown in Figure 2-40, D. The equation shows that there are two
routes of decreasing contact angle; one is to have a high-surfaceenergy solid surface, and the other is to use a low-surface-tension
liquid. It is important to point out that Young’s equation shown in
Figure 2-40 assumes a perfectly flat surface at the molecular level,
and any surface roughness and impurities can cause a deviation in
the values of contact angle calculated by Young’s equation.

CRITICAL QUESTION
You observe a lack of soft or hard tissue details in a gypsum model you have
made from a hydrophobic impression material. What steps can be taken to
eliminate this problem when you are using this impression material in the future?

46

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Acrylic sheet
0°

= 75°

A

= 110°

B

C
LV

Vapor

Liquid
SV

SL

0

Solid
LV cos

SV =

SL +

LV cos

D
• Figure 2-40 Contact angles of distilled water on three surfaces and relationship among interfacial energy. A, Water spreads freely on a flame-cleaned glass slide (good wetting). The profile depicted here is
considered to have a 0° contact angle. B, Water on an acrylic surface. C, Water on a Teflon surface (poor
wetting). D, Relationships between the interfacial energies at vapor/liquid (γVL), liquid/solid (γLS), and solid/
vapor (γSV) interfaces with respect to contact angle at equilibrium; the relationship is also known as Young’s
equation.

Issues of wetting associated with individual material occur
daily in clinical dentistry and are discussed in later chapters.
Here is one example of interest. When gypsum products discussed in Chapter 13 are mixed with water to pour dental models
on various types of impressions, wetting must occur between
gypsum and the impression to ensure good surface quality of the
gypsum model. The basic ingredient of the most popular silicone-based elastomeric impression material today is hydrophobic because a contact angle of greater than 90° is observed when
an aqueous medium is poured into this elastomeric mold. To
improve the wettability of the set impression material by a gypsum–water mixture, the operator usually sprays a surfactant (also
called debubblizer) on the impression before pouring. The most
direct approach by the manufacturer is to incorporate a wetting
agent (also known as a surfactant) in the impression material
during the manufacturing process (Chapter 13, Wettability of
Impression Materials and Hydrophilization of PVS). The wetting agent migrates to the solid surface and accommodates surface wetting by the aqueous gypsum-forming mixture. One may
think that surfactant increases the surface energy of the impression material. The fact is just the opposite. The surfactant on the
solid surface dissolves in the water of the gypsum product that
reduces the cohesive attraction between water molecules and,
thus, lowers the contact angle of the gypsum slurry on the
impression surface. Table 2-4 lists contact angles of probing liquids on selected materials.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Micromechanical bonding of resin sealant to tooth enamel is usually quite
effective in preventing pit and fissure areas from tooth decay. However,
many factors can reduce the bonding effectiveness, resulting in partial
or total loss of the sealant. Which of these factors are possible causes of
debonding?

Mechanical Interlocking
Strong attachment of one substance to another can also be accomplished by mechanical means rather than by molecular attraction. Such structural retention may be crude, as evidenced by
some nondental applications involving the use of screws, bolts,
or undercuts. Similar procedures that involve more subtle mechanisms are also used in restorative dentistry and are called mechanical interlocking or bonding.
Before resin-based adhesives were introduced to dentistry, various types of pastes or slightly viscous materials, like zinc phosphate
cement (Chapter 7, Zinc Phosphate Cement), were being used to
retain cast gold alloy crowns or base metal endodontic posts and
cores. These materials do not form a strong molecular attraction
to the substrate surface, but they provide the needed retention to
hold the prostheses in place. In this scenario, the luting medium
penetrates irregularities that exist on the intaglio of the casting
and those that are present on the adjoining tooth structure. Upon
hardening, the numerous cementing material projections embedded in the adherend surface provide the anchorage for mechanical
retention. This process is often called micromechanical bonding.
Good wetting is necessary to ensure penetration.
The early versions of resin-based filling materials did not form
a strong attraction to tooth structure, and consequently, leakage adjacent to the restoration occurred. Such leakage patterns
contribute to marginal stain, secondary caries, and irritation of
the pulp. This drawback was brought under control only when
acid etching of enamel had been accepted as a routine procedure.
Before insertion of the resin, the enamel of the adjoining tooth
structure is exposed to phosphoric acid for a short period, and
then rinsed to remove any residual acid. The acid produces minute
irregularities on the enamel surface, into which the resin flows
when it is placed into the tooth preparation. On hardening, these
resin projections provide improved mechanical retention of the

CHAPTER 2

TABLE 2-4

Structure of Matter, General Classes of Material and Principles of Adhesion

47

Contact Angles of Probing Liquids on Solid Surfaces

Solid

Probing Liquid

Amalgam1

Mercury

2

Contact Angle
(degree)
145

Water

77

Acrylic denture resins

Water

75

Dental ceramic (feldspathic
core)3

Water

71

Dental ceramic (feldspathic
core)3

Bonding resin

Amalgam

2

2

Teflon

4

Commercial pure titanium

54

Water

110

Water

54

Contact Angle
(degree)

Impression Materials

Probing Liquid

Polyether5

Water

30–44

Polysulfide

Gypsum solution
(0.2 gm/mL)

76–85

Addition silicone5

Water

34–105

Addition silicone
(hydrophilic)5

Water

20–78

Condensation silicone5

Water

82–103

6

Note: Depending on the measuring methods and the materials used, the values obtained are likely to be different among studies. The table is intended to give readers a general idea of the contact angles
of various dental materials.
1
Baran G, O’Brien WJ: Wetting of amalgam alloys by mercury. JADA 94:898–900, 1977.
2
O’Brien WJ: Capillary penetration of liquids between dissimilar solids. PhD Dissertation, University of Michigan, 1967.
3
Oh W, Shen C, Alegre B, Anusavice KJ: Wetting characteristic of ceramic to water and adhesive resin. J Prosthet Dent 88:616–621, 2002.
4
Ponsonnet L, Reybier K, Jaffrezic N, et al: Relationship between surface properties (roughness, wettability) of titanium and titanium alloys and cell behavior. Mat Sci Eng C 23:551–556, 2003.
5
Cullen DR, Mikesell JW, Sandik JL: Wettability of elastomeric impression materials and voids in gypsum casts. J Prosthet Dent 66:261–265, 1991.
6
Pratten DH, Craig RG: Wettability of a hydrophilic addition silicone impression material. J Prosthet Dent 61:197–201, 1989.

Adhesive

Air
Solid

• Figure 2-41 Air pockets form in a surface irregularity even when the contact angle of the adhesive is
low. These voids contribute to the propagation of adhesive failure by concentration of stresses.

restoration, thereby reducing the possibility of interfacial leakage.
In fact, the etching procedure cleans the enamel surface and creates more surface area, facilitating greater wettability of the enamel
by the adhesive and, subsequently, a stronger bond.
It is important to note that whereas surface imperfections provide sites for mechanical bonding, there are areas that adhesives
may not fill because of trapped air pockets (Figure 2-41). When
the adhesive interfacial region is subjected to thermal changes and
mechanical stresses, stress concentrations develop around these
voids. The stress may become so great that it initiates a separation in
the adhesive bond adjacent to the void. This crack may propagate
from one void to the next, and the joint may separate under stress.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the main challenges involved in bonding to tooth structure?

Bonding to Tooth Structure
Adhesive bonding to tooth structure and other dental materials
has become a major component of restorative dentistry. So far,
we have used an ideal adherend that has a clean surface with uniform composition and certain surface irregularities in our discussion of bonding. Tooth structure does not fall into that category.
Tooth composition is heterogeneous. Both organic and inorganic

components are present in different amounts in dentin compared
with enamel. A material that can adhere to the organic components
may not adhere to the inorganic components, and an adhesive that
bonds to enamel may not adhere to dentin to the same extent.
The instruments used to prepare the tooth for bonding leave
a rough surface and debris, which promote air entrapment at the
interface. Such prepared surfaces are routinely treated with appropriate agents to remove the debris. New debris must be removed
after each additional procedure, in addition to dealing with saliva
contamination. Furthermore, there is a fluid exchange through certain components of the tooth. The dental adhesive must compete
with water for wetting the tooth surface by displacing or incorporating it. Then, too, the adhesive must sustain long-term adhesion
to the tooth structure in an aqueous environment. Attempts are
being made to use more hydrophilic resins that are not as sensitive
to the presence of moisture as materials currently in use. To further enhance adhesive bonding to tooth structure or other dental
materials, the incorporation of functional groups that have the
potential of chemically reacting with the bonding substrate is also
being sought. Perhaps there will be no need for mechanical retention in the cavity preparation in the future. Keeping the surface
free of contamination remains a vital part of bonding procedures.
These subjects are discussed in detail in Chapter 6, Mechanisms of
Adhesion and Acid-Etch Technique, which deals with materials
for bonding applications.

48

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Selected Readings
Abbaschian R, Abbaschian L, Reed-Hill RE: Physical Metallurgy Principles, ed 4, Stamford CT, 2009, Cengage Learning.
An excellent textbook on physical metallurgy that discusses the solidification of metals and alloys and the formation of equiaxed polycrystalline and dendritic microstructures.
Brantley WA, Cai Z, Carr AB, et al: Metallurgical structures of as-cast
and heat-treated high-palladium dental alloys, Cells Mater 3:103–114,
1993.
High-palladium alloys with equiaxed polycrystalline and dendritic
microstructures are described. Careful study of the micrographs is
useful for comparing the potential structural integrity and some properties of these alloys.
Buonocore MG: The Use of Adhesives in Dentistry, Springfield, IL, 1975,
Charles C Thomas.
The problems associated with dental adhesives are nicely illustrated. It
is of interest that many of the procedures using bonding technology
discussed in this text have become commonplace.
Cowie JMG, Arrighi V: Polymers: Chemistry and Physics of Modern Materials, ed 3, Boca Raton, FL, 2007, CRC Press.
Emphasizes structure/property relationships in polymers. Written for
nonchemists who require a brief, readable introduction to polymer
chemistry.

Good RJ: Contact angle, wetting, and adhesion: a critical review, J Adhes
Sci Technol 6:1269–1302, 1992.
An excellent review on the fundamentals of contact angle and wetting
and their relationship to adhesion.
Habib E, Wang R, Wang Y, et al: Inorganic fillers for dental resin composites: Present and future, ACS Biomater Sci Eng 2:1–11, 2016.
Pampuch R: An Introduction to Ceramics. Lecture Notes in Chemistry,
Vol. 86, 2014, Springer International Publishing.
Rueggeberg FA: From vulcanite to vinyl, a history of resins in restorative
dentistry, J Prosthet Dent 87:364–379, 2002.
A comprehensive review of the introduction and evolution of polymeric materials in modern dentistry.
Söderholm K-JM: Coatings in dentistry—A review of some basic principles, Coatings 2:138–159, 2012.
This paper reviews fundamental principles of surface properties/
adhesives since these topics form the foundation for most coating
procedures used in dentistry.
Van Vlack LH: Elements of Materials Science and Engineering, ed 6, Reading, MA, 1989, Addison-Wesley.
An excellent primer on materials science. Chapter 5 describes phase
diagrams, and Chapters 8 and 9 present deformation and strengthening mechanisms for alloys.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Reading (Web Version)
Structure of Matter
Callister WD, Jr, Rethwisch DG: Materials Science and Engineering: An
Introduction, ed 8, Hoboken, NJ, 2010, John Wiley & Sons.
An excellent text on materials science for a more in-depth coverage of
materials structure and properties.
Gordon JE: The New Science of Strong Materials, or Why You Don’t Fall
Through the Floor? ed 2, Princeton, NJ, 1984, Princeton University Press.
A general discussion of the strength of materials from a fundamental
base. The sections on biological structural materials, timber, cellulose,
teeth, and bone are particularly interesting.
Van Vlack LH: Elements of Materials Science and Engineering, ed 6,
Reading, MA, 1989, Addison-Wesley.
An excellent primer on materials science. Chapter 5 describes phase
diagrams, and Chapters 8 and 9 present deformation and strengthening mechanisms for alloys.
Metal
Abbaschian R, Abbaschian L, Reed-Hill RE: Physical Metallurgy Principles, ed 4, Stamford, CT, 2009, Cengage Learning.
An excellent textbook on physical metallurgy that discusses the solidification of metals and alloys and the formation of equiaxed polycrystalline and dendritic microstructures.
Brantley WA, Cai Z, Carr AB, et al: Metallurgical structures of as-cast
and heat-treated high-palladium dental alloys, Cells Mater 3:103–114,
1993.
High-palladium alloys with equiaxed polycrystalline and dendritic
microstructures are described. Careful study of the micrographs is
useful for comparing the potential structural integrity and some properties of these alloys.
Brantley WA, Cai Z, Vermilyea SG, et al: Effects of solidification
conditions and heat treatment on the microstructure and Vickers hardness of Pd-Cu-Ga dental alloys, Cells Mater 6:127–135,
1996.
This article shows that the incidence of hot tears in a high-palladium
alloy with a dendritic as-cast microstructure is much greater when the
alloy is quenched rather than bench-cooled. The path of crack propagation is between adjacent interdendritic regions.
Carr AB, Cai Z, Brantley WA, et al: New high-palladium casting alloys:
Part 2. Effects of heat treatment and burnout temperature, Int J
Prosthodont 6:233–241, 1993.
This article discusses the formation of hot tears in a high-palladium
alloy with a dendritic as-cast microstructure and the potential role of
burnout temperature on their formation.
Cullity BD: Principles of X-Ray Diffraction, ed 2, Reading, MA, 1978,
Addison-Wesley.
A description of x-ray diffraction techniques used to determine crystal
structures of metallic materials. Chapter 13 in this book summarizes
the ordered structures in gold-copper alloys.
Flinn R, Trojan P: Engineering Materials and Their Applications, ed 3, Boston, MA, 1986, Houghton Mifflin, pp 116–169.
A discussion of equilibrium [phase diagram] and nonequilibrium conditions in systems as related to properties. There are excellent photographs and examples.
Guo WH, Brantley WA, Li D, et al: Annealing study of palladium-silver
dental alloys: Vickers hardness measurements and SEM microstructural observations, J Mater Sci Mater Med 18:111–118, 2007.
Photomicrographs of representative as-cast and heat-treated Pd-Ag
alloys and a detailed description of the hardness changes caused by
heat treatment.
Metals Handbook, desk edition. Metals Park, OH 1992, American Society
of Metals.
A comprehensive reference book on the structure, properties, and processing of metals. This book also describes testing methods for metals
and provides an excellent review of fractographic analysis procedures
for the study of fractured metals.

Nielsen JP, Tuccillo JJ: Grain size in cast gold alloys, J Dent Res 45:964–
969, 1966.
Although there may be uncertainty about the suggested homogeneous
nucleation mechanism, this is the classic reference on grain refinement
in dental gold alloys.
Nitta SV, Clark WAT, Brantley WA, et al: TEM analysis of tweed structure
in high-palladium dental alloys. J Mater Sci Mater Med 10:513–517,
1999.
The characteristic submicron tweed structure and microtwins in these
alloys are described.
Porter DA, Easterling KE: Phase Transformations in Metals and Alloys,
ed 2, London, 1992, Chapman & Hall.
This undergraduate engineering textbook describes phase transformations and the structure and properties of interfaces.
Smith DL, Burnett AP, Brooks MS, Anthony DH: Iron-platinum hardening in casting golds for use with porcelain, J Dent Res 49:283–288,
1970.
The hardening mechanism appears to be the transformation between
FePt3 and FePt.
Uzuka T, Kanzawa Y, Yasuda K: Determination of the AuCu superlative formation region in gold-copper-silver ternary system, J Dent Res
60:883–889, 1981.
A classic article that presents the solid-state transformations in this
important ternary alloy system.
Wu Q, Brantley WA, Mitchell JC, et al: Heat-treatment behavior of highpalladium dental alloys, Cells Mater 7:161–174, 1997.
Evidence is presented for the contribution of a very hard phase to the
strengthening of some high-palladium alloys, and the formation of
discontinuous precipitates is described.
Yasuda K, Ohta M: Difference in age-hardening mechanism in dental
gold alloys, J Dent Res 61:473–479, 1982.
A comprehensive description of the ordered structures and other
phases that provide age hardening of ternary gold-silver-copper alloys.
Yasuda K, van Tendeloo G, Van Landuyt J, et al: High-resolution electron
microscopic study of age-hardening in a commercial dental gold alloy,
J Dent Res 65:1179–1185, 1986.
This article shows the unique ability of high-resolution transmission
electron microscopy to reveal the complex ordered structures in a
commercial dental gold casting alloy.
Ceramic
Kelly JR: Dental ceramics: What is this stuff anyway? J Am Dent Assoc
139:4S–7S, 2008.
Pampuch R: An Introduction to Ceramics. Lecture Notes in Chemistry, Vol 86, 2014, Springer International Publishing.
Polymer
Cowie JMG, Arrighi V: Polymers: Chemistry and Physics of Modern
Materials, ed 3, Boca Raton, FL, 2007, CRC Press.
Emphasizes structure/property relationships in polymers. Written for
nonchemists who require a brief, readable introduction to polymer
chemistry.
Morrison RT, Boyd RN: Organic Chemistry, ed 6, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
2007, Prentice Hall.
A classic text that provides a fundamental understanding of mechanisms and molecular structure. Concisely written with emphasis on
key issues that build step by step to make difficult concepts easier to
understand.
Rueggeberg FA: From vulcanite to vinyl, a history of resins in restorative dentistry. J Prosthet Dent 87:364–379, 2002.
A comprehensive review of the introduction and evolution of polymeric materials in modern dentistry.
Sun SF: Physical Chemistry of Macromolecules: Basic Principles and Issues,
ed 2, Hoboken NJ, 2004, Wiley.
An integrated review of polymers and biological macromolecules biophysical chemistry and physical polymer chemistry. Structured to provide a clear and consistent overview of molecular structure, physical
properties, and basic structural properties and relationships.
48.e1

Ward IM, Sweeney J: An Introduction to Mechanical Properties of Solid
Polymers, ed 2, Hoboken, NJ, 2004, Wiley.
A comprehensive introduction to the mechanical behavior of solid
polymers, including mechanical relaxation and anisotropy, composites, viscoelasticity, yield behavior, and fracture of tough polymers.
Useful Websites for Dental Resins
(Accessed June 2020)
Polymer Chemistry Glossary. http://discovery.kcpc.usyd.edu.au/glossary
-all.html.
Polymer Science Learning Center. https://pslc.ws/macrog/level3.htm.
Virtual Textbook of Organic Chemistry—Polymers. https://www2.chemistry.msu.edu/faculty/reusch/VirtTxtJml/polymers.htm#polmr1.
Composite
Chou T-W, McCullough RL, Pipes RB: Composites, Sci Am 255(4):192–
203, 1986.
Habib E, Wang R, Wang Y, et al: Inorganic fillers for dental resin composites: Present and future, ACS Biomater Sci Eng 2:1–11, 2016.
Principle of Adhesion
Buonocore MG: The use of adhesives in dentistry, Springfield, IL,
1975, Charles C Thomas.
The problems associated with dental adhesives are nicely illustrated. It
is of interest that many of the procedures using bonding technology
discussed in this text have become commonplace.

48.e2

Glantz P: On wettability and adhesiveness: a study of enamel, dentine,
some restorative dental materials, and dental plaque, Odontol Rev
20(Suppl 17):1–132, 1969.
The author proposed that the reduction of dental caries by topical fluorides resulted from lowering the surface energy of the tooth
structure and thereby reducing plaque accumulation over a given
interval.
Good RJ: Contact angle, wetting, and adhesion: a critical review,
J Adhes Sci Technol 6:1269–1302, 1992.
An excellent review on the fundamentals of contact angle and wetting
and their relationship to adhesion.
Phillips RW, Ryge G: Proceedings on Adhesive Restorative Dental Materials,
Spencer, IN, 1961, Owen Litho Service.
The recommendations for critically important areas of research have
provided an impetus for investigations in this area.
Söderholm K-JM: Coatings in dentistry—A review of some basic
principles, Coatings 2:138–159, 2012.
This paper reviews fundamental principles of surface properties/adhesives since these topics form the foundation for most coating procedures used in dentistry.
Zisman WA: Influence of constitution on adhesion, Ind Eng Chem
55:18–38, 1963.
One of the pioneers in surface phenomena discusses parameters that
influence wetting.

3

Physical and Chemical Properties
of Solids
OUTLINE
Rheology

Electrochemical Properties

Structural Relaxation

Magnetic Materials

Thermal Properties

KEY TERMS
Dilatant Resistance to flow increases as the rate of deformation
(shear strain rate) increases. The more rapidly dilatant fluids are
stirred or forced through a syringe, the more viscous (thicker)
and more resistant to flow they become.
Pseudoplastic Viscous character that is opposite from dilatant
behavior in which the rate of flow decreases with increasing
strain rate until it reaches a nearly constant value. Thus the
more rapidly pseudoplastic fluids are stirred or forced through
a syringe, the less viscous (thinner) and more easily they flow.
Rheology Study of the deformation and flow characteristics of
matter (see viscosity).
Thixotropic Property of gels and other fluids to become less
viscous and flow when subjected to steady shear forces through
being shaken, stirred, squeezed, patted, or vibrated. When the
shear force is decreased to zero, the viscosity increases to the
original value over a short time delay.
Viscosity Resistance of a fluid to flow (see rheology).

Opacity The extent to which light does not pass through a material.
No image and no light can be seen through an opaque object.
Reflection The amount of light that reflects from the surface of an
object.
Refract/Refraction The degree to which light is bent when
it passes from one medium to another. This makes a spoon
appear bent in a glass of drinking water when light passes
from air through glass into water, reflects from the spoon, and
then passes back through water and glass into air. The index of
refraction is a measure of this effect.
Translucency Property of an object in which light is scattered as it
passes through, revealing a diffuse image.
Transmit/Transmission The amount of light passing through an
object.
Transparency The extent to which light passes through a material
and to which an undistorted image can be seen through it.
Value Relative lightness or darkness of a color. Also known as
luminous reflectance and the gray scale.

STRUCTURAL RELAXATION

THERMAL PROPERTIES

Creep Time-dependent plastic strain of a solid under a static load
or constant stress.
Sag Irreversible (plastic) deformation of metal frameworks of fixed
dental prostheses in the firing temperature range of ceramic veneers.

Coefficient of thermal expansion (linear coefficient of
expansion) Change in length per unit of the original length of
a material when its temperature is raised by 1 K.
Kelvin (K) The kelvin (K) temperature scale extends the degree
Celsius scale such that zero degrees K is defined as absolute
zero (= −273.15 °C). Temperatures on this scale are called
“kelvins, ” not “ degrees kelvin,” kelvin is not capitalized, and
the symbol (capital K) stands alone with no degree symbol;
1 K = 1 °C, K = °C + 273.15.
Thermal conductivity (coefficient of thermal
conductivity) Property that describes the thermal energy
transport in watts per second through a material 1 cm thick
with a cross-sectional area of 1 cm2 when the temperature
differential between the surfaces of the material perpendicular
to the heat flow is 1 K.
Thermal diffusivity Measure of the speed with which a
temperature change will proceed through an object when one
surface is heated.

RHEOLOGY

COLOR AND OPTICAL EFFECTS
Absorption The extent to which light is absorbed by the material
in an object.
Chroma Degree of saturation of a particular hue (dominant color).
Color Sensation induced from light of varying wavelengths that
reaches the eye.
Esthetics Principles and techniques associated with the
development of the color and appearance required to produce
a natural, pleasing effect in the dentition.
Hue Dominant color of an object (e.g., red, green, or blue).
Metamerism Phenomenon in which the color of an object under
one type of light source (e.g., room light) appears to change
when illuminated by a different light source (e.g., sunlight).

49

50

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

ELECTROCHEMICAL PROPERTIES
Concentration cell Electrochemical corrosion cell in which the
potential difference is associated with the difference in concentration of a dissolved species, such as oxygen, in solution along
different areas of a metal surface. Pitting corrosion and crevice
corrosion are types of concentration cell corrosion.
Corrosion Chemical or electrochemical process in which a solid,
usually a metal, is attacked by an environmental agent, resulting
in partial or complete dissolution.
Electromotive series Arrangement of metals by their equilibrium values of electrode oxidation potential. Used to judge
the tendency of metals and alloys to undergo electrochemical
(galvanic) corrosion.
Galvanic corrosion (electrogalvanism) Accelerated attack
occurring on a less noble metal when electrochemically
dissimilar metals are in electrical contact within a liquid
corrosive environment.

Every dentist in the process of making or delivering a restoration
must select various materials to complete the task. In making
the choice, the dentist must have a thorough knowledge of the
properties and behavioral characteristics of the materials chosen,
namely, the physical and chemical properties. Physical properties are
based on the laws of mechanics, acoustics, optics, thermodynamics,
electricity, magnetism, radiation, atomic structure, and nuclear
phenomena. Chemical properties are based on the ways in which
substances interact, combine, and change at the molecular level, as
governed by their outer orbital electrons.
From the categories of dental materials and challenges
discussed in Chapter 1, there are specific behaviors of the materials
during processing and use that dentists should consider, such
as the flowability (or formability), esthetic appearance, thermal
expansion, chemical durability, and magnetism of the materials. As
examples, flow and viscosity (the resistance of a fluid to flow) are
essential properties for mixing direct restorative materials (Chapter
1, Direct Restorative Materials) and gypsum products and impression
materials (Chapter 13). Creep (slow deformation under a static
load) is relevant to the clinical performance of amalgam (Chapter 8,
Creep) and the fabrication of metal-ceramic prostheses (Chapter 10,
Requirements of Metal Component). The physical properties of color
and thermal expansion are of particular importance to the performance
of all restorations, especially for dental ceramics (Chapter 10, Physical
Properties). Tarnish and corrosion are electrochemical properties that
strongly affect the performance of metals and their alloys (Chapters 8
and 9). Magnetic-able prostheses materials are often used for retaining
implant-borne prostheses and for orthodontic tooth movement in
place. Mechanical properties, a subset of physical properties based on
the laws of mechanics, are discussed in Chapter 4.
These phenomena will be discussed in greater detail in later
chapters. However, having a firm grasp of the underlying principles
that govern the properties is critical.

Rheology
Rheology is the study of the deformation and flow characteristics
of matter under stress, whether liquid or solid. Dental professionals
must manipulate a wide variety of dental materials in a fluid state to
achieve successful clinical outcomes. Moreover, the manipulation

Galvanic shock Pain sensation caused by the electrical current
generated when two dissimilar metals are brought into contact
in the oral environment.
Stress corrosion Degradation caused by the combined effects
of mechanical stress and a corrosive environment, usually
exhibited as cracking.
Tarnish Process by which a metal surface is dulled or discolored
when a reaction with a sulfide, oxide, chloride, or other chemical
causes surface discoloration through the formation of a thin
oxidized film.

MAGNETIC MATERIALS
Magnet Metallic material in which the component atoms are so
ordered that it attracts iron-containing objects or aligns itself in
an external magnetic field.
Tesla Unit of flux density (T) of the magnetic field produced by a
magnet.

and handling of a given material in the liquid state determine
this material’s performance as a solid. Most dental materials are
initially in a fluid state so that they can be placed and shaped as
required; then they undergo transformation to a solid state, in
which they are durable and perform their function. Cements and
impression materials undergo a fluid-to-solid transformation in
the mouth. Gypsum products used in the fabrication of models
and dies are transformed extraorally from fluid slurries into solids
(see Chapter 13, Gypsum Products).
Although a liquid at rest cannot support a shear stress (shearing
force per unit shearing area), most liquids, when placed in motion,
resist imposed forces that cause them to move. This resistance to
fluid flow, termed viscosity, is controlled by internal frictional forces
within the liquid. Thus viscosity is a measure of the consistency of a
fluid and the fluid’s resistance to flow. Therefore highly viscous fluids
flow slowly. Dental materials exhibit differing viscosities depending
on their intended clinical application. In everyday life, we find wide
differences in viscosities among such fluids as water, syrup, ketchup,
moisturizing cream, and toothpaste. We will be discussing dental
materials of various viscosities in later chapters.
The concept of viscosity is illustrated in Figure 3-1. A liquid
occupies the space between two flat surfaces, such as when a spatula is moved through a pasty fluid, for example, a dental cement,
to blend two components on a mixing pad. The mixing surface
is fixed, and the upper surface (e.g., a spatula blade) moves to the
right at a given velocity (V) with sufficient force (F) to overcome

Shear force

Velocity = V

Liquid

d

Area = A

• Figure 3-1 Shear strain, ε ( = V/d) of a viscous liquid between two
plates caused by translation of the top plate at a velocity, V, relative to the
stationary lower plate. This illustrates, for example, a spatula blade mixing
dental cement on a mixing pad.

CHAPTER 3

Shear stress,

Plastic

Dilatant

Newtonian
Pseudoplastic
Strain rate,

• Figure 3-2 Shear stress versus shear strain rate for fluids exhibiting different types of rheological behaviors.

the frictional resistance within the fluid and cause the fluid to flow.
As discussed in Chapter 1, What Is Force?, stress is the force per
unit area that develops within a structure when an external force
is applied. If the two surfaces have an area (A) in contact with the
liquid, a shear stress (τ) can be defined as τ = F/A. The shear strain
rate is ε = V/d, where d is the shear distance of the upper surface
relative to the fixed lower surface, and V is the velocity of the moving surface. As the shear stress τ increases, ε increases, and a curve
can be obtained for shear stress versus strain rate.
The rheologic behaviors of four types of fluids are shown in
Figure 3-2. Curves depicting shear stress versus shear strain rate
are used to characterize the viscous behavior of fluids, and the viscosity (η) is defined as the shear stress divided by the strain rate,
η = t/ε . The straight line from the origin in Figure 3-2 shows that
the force applied is proportional to the strain rate of the fluid. This
is known as Newtonian viscosity. A Newtonian fluid has a constant
viscosity independent of the strain rate. Viscosity is measured in
units of pascal second (Pa⋅s) or centipoise (cP; 1Pa⋅s = 10,000 cP).
Pure water at 20 °C has a viscosity of 1.0 cP, whereas the viscosity
of molasses is approximately 300,000 cP (30 Pa⋅s). This value is
similar to that of tempered agar hydrocolloid impression material
(281,000 cP or 28.1 Pa⋅s at 45 °C). Of the elastomeric impression materials, light-body (“thin” consistency) polysulfide has a
viscosity of 109,000 cP (10.9 Pa⋅s), compared with 1,360,000
cP (136 Pa⋅s) for heavy-body (“thick” consistency) polysulfide at
36 °C. The viscosity of most fluids decreases rapidly with increasing temperature, which is the reason the reported values for material viscosity often include the temperature at measurement.
The viscosity of many dental materials decreases with increasing
strain rate until the viscosity reaches a nearly constant value. That
is, the faster materials are stirred, forced through a syringe, or
squeezed, the less viscous and more fluid they become. This is called
pseudoplastic viscosity and is illustrated by the change in the slope
of the plot in Figure 3-2. Liquids that show the opposite behavior
are dilatant and become more rigid as the rate of deformation (shear
strain rate) increases. That is, the faster they are stirred, squeezed,
and so forth, the more viscous and resistant to flow they become.
Some classes of materials behave like a rigid body until some
minimum value of shear stress is reached. This is represented by the
offset along the shear-stress axis. These fluids, which exhibit rigid
behavior initially and then attain constant viscosity, are referred to
as “plastic.” Ketchup is a familiar example—a sharp blow to the
bottle is usually required to produce an initial flow.

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

51

Viscosity may also depend on the previous deformation of
the liquid. Thixotropic fluids become less viscous upon repeated
applications of pressure and stay at that lower viscosity for a short
period of time before the viscosity of the previous state is regained.
Dental prophylaxis pastes, plaster of Paris, resin cements, and
some impression materials are thixotropic. The thixotropic nature
of impression materials is beneficial because the material dispensed
from the syringe will maintain a lower viscosity for a while, allowing better wetting of the tissue. The material then stops moving
when a state of higher viscosity is regained. For instance, prophylaxis paste does not flow out of a rubber cup until this is rotated
against the teeth to be cleaned. For pseudoplastic materials, the
material regains the viscosity as soon as the stressing stops.

Structural Relaxation
Structural relaxation is a rheological phenomenon of solids that
occurs so slowly that it is not noticed until the process completes.
The two categories of interest in dentistry are (1) stress relaxation
and (2) creep and flow.

Stress Relaxation
After an object or substance has been permanently deformed, a
process of shape changing by force, the atoms and molecules are
displaced and are no longer in equilibrium positions. There are
trapped internal stresses that make the structure unstable. The substance can relieve these stresses through a solid-state diffusion process driven by thermal energy, where the atoms can slowly return
to their equilibrium positions. The result is a change in the shape
or contour of the solid as the atoms or molecules change positions.
The process is known as stress relaxation and may cause warping
or distortion of the object. Such stress relaxation can occur with
elastomeric impression materials and can lead to distortions in the
impression and a subsequent lack of fit of the prostheses, as discussed in Chapter 13, Elasticity and Viscoelasticity.
The rate of relaxation increases with an increase in temperature.
For example, if a wire is bent, the wire may tend to straighten out
if it is heated to a high temperature. At room temperature, any
such relaxation caused by the rearrangement of metal atoms may
be negligible. On the other hand, there are many noncrystalline
dental materials (e.g., waxes, resins, and gels) that, when manipulated and cooled, can then undergo relaxation (with consequent
distortion) at a slightly elevated temperature.

Creep and Flow
If a solid metal is held at a temperature near this metal’s melting
point and is subjected to a constant load, the resulting strain will
increase over time. Creep is defined as the time-dependent plastic
strain of a material under a static load or constant stress. Metals for
cast restorations or metal-ceramic prostheses have melting points
(for pure metals) or melting ranges (for alloys) that are much
higher than mouth temperatures, and they are not susceptible to
creep deformation intraorally. However, some alloys used for longspan metal-ceramic bridge structures can sag under the influence
of the mass of the prosthesis at porcelain-firing temperatures. This
phenomenon is discussed further in Chapter 9, Requirements of
Alloys for Metal-Ceramic Applications.
Dental amalgams, because of their mercury content, begin
melting at temperatures a few hundred degrees above room
temperature. Because of amalgam’s low melting range, this material
can undergo creep at a restored tooth site under periodic sustained

52

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

stress, such as would be imposed by patients who clench their
teeth. Because creep produces continuing plastic deformation, the
process can, over time, be very destructive to a dental amalgam
filling. The relationship of this property to the behavior of
amalgam restorations is discussed in Chapter 8, Creep.
The term flow, rather than creep, has generally been used in
dentistry to describe the rheology of amorphous materials such
as waxes (Chapter 13, Flow of Dental Wax). The flow of wax is
a measure of the potential to deform under a small static load,
which includes its own mass. Creep or flow characteristics are
determined using a cylinder of prescribed dimensions subjected
to a given compressive load for a specified time and temperature.
The creep or flow is measured as the percentage decrease in length
that occurs under these testing conditions. Creep may cause
unacceptable deformation of dental restorations (e.g., low-copper
dental amalgam) made from a material that is used clinically at a
temperature near its melting point for an extended period.

Color and Optical Effects
Esthetic considerations in restorative and prosthetic dentistry
have received increasingly greater emphasis in recent decades,
and the challenges have grown even greater in the past few years
following the widespread use of bleaching and whitening technologies. Thus the development of a general-purpose, techniqueinsensitive, direct-filling, tooth-colored, color-stable restorative
material remains one of the more serious challenges of current
dental materials research.
Because esthetic dentistry imposes severe demands on the
artistic abilities of the dentist and technician, knowledge of the
underlying scientific principles of color and other optical effects

is essential. This is especially true for the increasingly popular
restorations that involve ceramic materials (see Chapter 10, Color
Matching Ability and Aesthetic Qualities).

Nature of Light and the Role of Human Vision
Light is electromagnetic radiation that can be detected by the
human eye. The eye is sensitive to wavelengths from approximately
400 nm (violet) to 700 nm (dark red), as shown in Figure 3-3.
For an object to be visible, this object must reflect or transmit
incident light from an external source. The incident light is usually polychromatic, that is, a mixture of the various wavelengths,
commonly known as “white” light. Incident light is selectively
absorbed or scattered (or both) at certain wavelengths. The spectral distribution of the transmitted or reflected light resembles that
of the incident light, although certain wavelengths are reduced in
magnitude.
The phenomenon of vision, and certain related terminology,
can be illustrated by considering the response of the human eye
to light reflected from an object. Light from an object that is
incident on the eye is focused in the retina and is converted into
nerve impulses, which are transmitted to the brain. The retina
has two types of cells that gather light: rods and cones. The rods
are around the outer ring of the retina and are active in dim
light. Cone-shaped cells in the retina are responsible for color
vision.
Signals from the retina are processed by the brain to produce
the psychophysiological perception of color. Because a neural
response is involved in color vision, constant stimulation by a
single color may result in color fatigue and a decrease in the
eye’s response. Defects in certain portions of the color-sensing
receptors result in the different types of color blindness; thus
Infrared

700

600
Prism

500

White
light source

Ultraviolet

400
Wavelength
(nm)

• Figure 3-3 Spectrum of visible light ranging in wavelength from 400 nm (violet) to 700 nm (red). The
most visually perceptible region of the equal energy spectrum under daylight conditions is between 540
and 570 nm, with a maximum value of visual perceptibility at 555 nm.

CHAPTER 3

humans vary greatly in their ability to distinguish colors. In a
scientific sense, one might liken the normal human eye to an
exceptionally sensitive differential colorimeter, a scientific
instrument that measures the intensities and wavelengths of
light. Although colorimeters are more precise than the human
eye in measuring slight differences in colored objects, they
are inaccurate for rough or curved surfaces. The eye is highly
sensitive in comparing two colors seen side by side, whether on
rough, smooth, flat, or curved surfaces.

The Nature of the Object Under View
Esthetics is critically important in dealing with dental restorative materials. For good esthetics, the interaction of light with restorative materials must mimic the interaction of light with natural teeth. The nature
of the restorative material, or that of any object under view, determines
how that object will appear. Electromagnetic radiation in the visible
region interacts with an object through reflection from the surface,
absorption, refraction, or transmission (i.e., by passing through
unchanged). These phenomena determine the opacity, translucency,
or transparency of an object. Light reflected from rough surfaces scatters in many directions because light is reflected at many angles by the
uneven surface. This leads to an appearance that ranges from mirrorlike
for a perfectly smooth surface (termed specular reflectance) to the flat,
dull appearance (termed diffuse reflectance) of a surface such as chalk.
The opacity of a material is related to the amount of light the
material can absorb and/or scatter. The opposite of opacity is
translucency. For example, if 1-mm thicknesses of each of two
materials absorb light passing through them, the material that

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

53

absorbs 20% of the light is less opaque and more translucent than
the material that absorbs 50%. Transparent materials are at the far
end of the translucency scale, absorb no light, and transmit 100%
of the light that passes through them.
Enamel is a composite material consisting of hydroxyapatite
crystals in a protein matrix. When light strikes enamel, some is
reflected, some refracted, some absorbed, and some transmitted.
Enamel has a refractive index of 1.65 and is translucent.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How is color described objectively and quantitatively?

Three Dimensions of Color
Verbal descriptions of color are not precise enough to describe
the appearance of teeth. For example, the definition of puce is
“a brilliant purplish-red color,” according to Microsoft’s Encarta
World English Dictionary, whereas Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary defines puce as “a dark red that is yellower and less strong
than cranberry, paler and slightly yellower than average garnet,
bluer, less strong, and slightly lighter than pomegranate, and bluer
and paler than average wine.” These definitions are too variable,
complex, and imprecise to describe a desired color of a dental
crown to a laboratory technician. Such a written description is
subjective and does not clearly and unambiguously allow someone
to perceive the color. To overcome this problem, color perception
is described by three independent and objective variables shown
in the Munsell color system: value, hue, and chroma (Figure 3-4).

L*(white)
-a*(green)
-b*(blue)

+b*(yellow)
+a*(red)

Chroma

Value

Hue
L*(black)

• Figure 3-4 The Munsell three-dimensional (3-D) color space. Yellow arrows show the three variables
of color: value, hue, and chroma. Value increases from black to white, chroma increases from the center
radially outward, and changes in hue occur in a circumferential direction. Blue arrows show the three coordinates of CIE L*a*b* axis: L* (value), a* (red-green), and b* (yellow-blue).

54

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

White

Value

9/

5PB

5P
7/
5RP

Hu
e

5B

5/2

5BG

5/6

5/10

5/14
5R
Chroma

5G
5YR
5GY

3/

5Y

/1
Black

• Figure 3-5 Munsell scale of hues, values, and chromas in the color space. (From Sakaguchi RL,
Powers JM: Craig’s Restorative Dental Materials, ed 13, St. Louis, 2012, Mosby.)

Value is also known as the gray scale and is the vertical, or z-axis,
on Figure 3-4. Value increases toward the high end (lighter) and
decreases toward the low end (darker). Value is also expressed by the
“lightness” factor, with varying levels of gray between the extremes
of white and black. Teeth and other objects can be separated into
lighter shades (higher value) and darker shades (lower value). For
example, the yellow of a lemon is lighter than the red of a cherry. For
a light-diffusing and light-reflecting object such as a tooth or dental
crown, the value identifies the lightness or darkness of a color, which
can be measured independently of the hue and chroma.
Hue is the dominant color of an object, for example, red,
green, or blue. This refers to the dominant wavelengths present in
the spectral distribution. The continuum of these hues creates the
three-dimensional (3-D) color solid shown in Figure 3-4.
Chroma is the degree of saturation of a particular hue. For
example, red can vary from “scarlet” to light pink, where scarlet
has a high saturation and pink has a low saturation. The yellow
color of a lemon is a more saturated, “vivid,” color than that of
a banana, which is a less saturated, “dull” yellow. Chroma varies
radially, perpendicular to the value axis (Figure 3-4). Colors in
the center are dull (gray). In other words, the higher the chroma,
the more intense the color. Chroma is not considered separately
in dentistry and is always associated with the hue and value of
dental tissues, restorations, and prostheses. The components of a
color space can be more easily visualized by the individual parts in
Figure 3-5, here seen as discs stacked along the value axis on a scale
of 0 to 10 from black to white. Around the periphery are 10 basic
hues (dominant wavelength/color). Chroma radiates out from the
value axis like the spokes of a wheel.
The color space can also be quantified by the CIE
(Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage) L*a*b* color space,
in which L* represents the value of an object from darker to

lighter, a* is the measurement along the red (+a*)-green (–a*)
axis, and b* is the measurement along the yellow (+b*)-blue
(–b*) axis (Figure 3-4).
Figure 3-6 represents a horizontal plane, perpendicular to the
L* axis, through a CIE L*a*b* color space. The dot above the
letter A is the color of a red apple, which is expressed by L* = 42.8,
a* = 47.1, and b* = 13.9. In comparison, the dot next to the letter
B is for a dental body (gingival) porcelain of shade A2 with a higher
(lighter) L* of 73.0, a lower a* of 1.0, and a higher b* of 14.4.
In the CIE L*a*b* color space, the difference between two colors (ΔE* or ΔE*ab) would be the distance between the two points
representing the two colors and can be determined by the following formula:
1

E *ab  [( L*)2  ( a*)2  ( b*)2 ] 2 .

(1)
The color difference formula is designed to provide a quantitative
representation of the color difference between a pair of colored
specimens under a given set of experimental conditions. The value,
however, is of little clinical significance without an understanding
of the magnitude of color difference considered perceptible or
acceptable by observers. The smallest perceptible color difference
or perceptibility threshold (PT) refers to the smallest color difference
that can be detected by 50% of observers under standardized
conditions. The range of PT values reported in the literature is
0.4 to 4.0, with ΔE* = 1.0 being the value reported most often.
Similarly, the difference in color that is esthetically acceptable by
50% of observers is known as the acceptability threshold (AT). The
range of AT values reported in the literature is 2.0 to 6.8, with a
range of 3.3 to 3.7 being the value reported most often. International
Standards Organization (ISO) 28642:2016 uses a PT of ΔE* = 1.2

CHAPTER 3

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

55

• Figure 3-6 Hunter L*a*b* color chart. The dot above the letter A is
the color of a red apple, which is expressed by L* = 42.8, a* = 47.1, and
b* = 13.9. (Courtesy Minolta Corporation, Instrument Systems Division,
Ramsey, NJ.)

• Figure 3-7 Tab arrangements of the Vitapan classical shade guide:
classical group division according to hue (top row), arrangement according to value scale with no group division from lightest to darkest (middle
row), and alternative arrangement according to color difference (ΔE*) in
relation to the lightest tab (bottom row). (From Paravina RD, Powers JM:
Esthetic color training in dentistry, St. Louis, 2004, Mosby.)

and an AT of ΔE* = 2.7, established in a prospective multicenter
research project.

Color Matching
In dental practice, color matching is most often performed with
the use of a shade guide, such as the one shown in Figure 3-7, to
select the color of ceramic veneers, inlays, or crowns. Shade-guide
tabs are used in much the same way as paint chips to match the
color of house paint. The individual shade tabs shown in the top
row of Figure 3-7 are grouped according to hue (A, B, C, and D,
where A = red-brown, B = red-yellow, C = gray, D = red-gray),
followed by value (1 to 4, or lightest to darkest). This arrangement follows the “classical” order originated by Vita for porcelain. Recently, however, the trend is to arrange shade guides in
decreasing order of value (lightest to darkest: B1, A1, B2, D2,
A2, C1, C2, D4, A3, D3, B3, A3.5, B4, C3, A4, C4), as shown
in the middle row of Figure 3-7. Matching of tooth shades is
simplified by the arrangement of tabs by value; this arrange-

• Figure 3-8 Vita shade guide used to match the restorative shade to the
adjacent teeth. (Courtesy Dr. Monica Fernandez.)

ment has been found to be easier and more reliable to use. The
bottom row of Figure 3-7 shows the arrangement according to
the color difference as calculated by equation (1), with respect
to the lightest tab. Although a reasonable match can be achieved
clinically between a tooth (or restoration) and one of the shadeguide tabs, relaying the information to a lab or technician can
prove to be a challenge. To ensure esthetic results, additional
information, such as drawings, descriptions, and photographs
(Figure 3-8), should also be sent. Obviously, if the technician
can see the actual teeth, the probability of achieving an acceptable color match will be even greater.
Further, the subjective preference of the patient must be
considered. An exact match between a crown or bridge and the
remaining sound teeth is not always sufficient. Patients usually
prefer a lighter shade (higher value) in a restoration compared
with the color of the natural teeth. Figure 3-9, A, shows the
result of shade matching in which the two central incisor
crowns were selected to be somewhat higher in value than the
lateral incisors. Even though there is a slight mismatch, the
color difference is perceptible only under close observation
(Figure 3-9, B), and the patient was quite satisfied with the
overall effect.

The Effect of the Observer
Signals of color are sent to the human brain from three sets of
receptors in the retina called cones, which are especially sensitive to
red, blue, and green. Factors that interfere with the true perception
of color generally include low or high light levels, fatigue of the color
receptors, sex, age, memory, and cultural background. However,
according to a 1995 study by Anusavice and Barrett, there appears
to be no effect related to observer age, gender, or clinical experience
relative to the accuracy of dental shade matching.
At low light levels, the rods in the retina of the human eye
are more dominant than the cones, and color perception is lost.
As the brightness becomes more intense, color appears to change
(Bezold–Brucke effect). Also, if an observer looks at a red object
for a reasonably long time, receptor fatigue causes a green hue to
be seen when he or she then looks at a white background. For
this reason, if a patient is observed against an intense-colored
background, the clinician may select a tooth shade with a hue
that is shifted somewhat toward the complementary color of the
background color. For example, a blue background shifts the
color selection toward yellow, and an orange background shifts

56

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

A

B
• Figure 3-9 Two central incisor metal-ceramic crowns with porcelain margins. A, The value (L*) of these
crowns is higher than that of the adjacent lateral incisor teeth. B, Close-up view of the crowns on the left.

the color selection toward blue-green. Unfortunately, 8% of the
male and 0.5% of the female population exhibit color blindness.
Most commonly, these people cannot distinguish red from green
because of the lack of either green-sensitive or red-sensitive cones.
However, this deficiency may not affect the shade selection of
natural teeth.
The ranges of hue, chroma, and value ordinarily found in
human teeth represent only a small portion of the standard color
space. For example, compare Figure 3-4 within the subset of the
color space shown in Figure 3-6. The selectivity of the human eye
is such that accurate color matching is difficult even when one is
using a shade guide that contains only a small number of shades
(Figure 3-7). Recent developments in the use of digital technology
for color matching are discussed in Chapter 15, Color Matching.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are some objects color matched under one type of illumination but
mismatched under another illumination source?

The Effect of the Light Source
Because the spectral distribution of the light reflected from or transmitted through an object is dependent on the spectral content of the
incident light, the appearance of an object is dependent on the nature
of the light in which the object is viewed. Daylight, incandescent,
and fluorescent lamps are common sources of light in the dental
operatory or laboratory, and each of these has a different spectral
distribution. Objects that appear to be color matched under one type
of light may appear different under another type. This phenomenon
is called metamerism. Thus, if possible, color matching should be
done under two or more different light sources, one of which should
be daylight, and the laboratory shade-matching procedures should
be performed under the same lighting conditions.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why do some tooth-colored restorations appear to be missing when viewed
under “blacklight” illumination, such as that used in nightclubs and at rock
concerts?

Fluorescence
In addition to the processes already discussed, natural tooth
structure absorbs light at wavelengths too short to be visible to
the human eye. These wavelengths between 300 and 400 nm

are referred to as near-ultraviolet radiation. Natural sunlight,
photoflash lamps, certain types of vapor lamps, and ultraviolet
lights used in decorative lighting (“blacklights”) are sources
containing substantial amounts of near-ultraviolet radiation.
The energy that the tooth absorbs is converted into light with
longer wavelengths, in which case the tooth actually becomes a
light source. This phenomenon is called fluorescence. The emitted
light, a blue-white color, is primarily in the 400- to 450-nm range.
Fluorescence makes a definite contribution to the brightness and
vital appearance of a human tooth. As an example, ceramic crowns
or composite restorations that lack a fluorescing agent appear as
missing teeth when viewed under a black light.

Radiopacity
X-rays, a form of electromagnetic radiation, lie at the high-energy
end of the spectrum. Hence the interaction of dental biomaterials
with x-radiation may be classified as an optical property. There
are numerous circumstances where the ability to distinguish a
dental material radiographically from the surrounding tissue is
necessary. For example, sufficient radiographic contrast is required
in an x-ray image to assess restorations for marginal defects or
breakdown, help differentiate composite restorations from dental
caries, and detect microleakage. In case of accidental ingestion
or traumatic impaction of dentures or other appliances, a delay
in the detection, location, and removal of the appliance and
appliance fragments may be life threatening. A significant number
of foreign bodies of dental origin, with many injuries and deaths,
are reported each year, particularly among the elderly.
The amount of x-ray energy absorbed by an object depends
on the density and thickness of the material and the energy of
the radiation. Generally, the higher the atomic number of the
component atoms, the greater the x-ray absorbance and the larger the
contrast produced. Polymers and resins are inherently radiolucent,
whereas metals with atomic numbers above about 19 (potassium)
are inherently radiopaque. To impart radiopacity, restorative resins
often use strontium- or barium-containing glass reinforcing particles
(see Chapter 5, Imparting Radiopacity); denture polymers may
(but rarely) contain barium-sulfate or other heavy-metal compound
additives to render them radiopaque. Radiopacity similar to that
of hard tissue provides the optimal contrast for dental restorations.
When radiopacity is too low, the resin will not be visible on an
x-ray image; when radiopacity is too high, this may block out and
obscure details of the adjacent anatomy. Dentin has approximately
the same radiodensity as that of aluminum, whereas enamel has

CHAPTER 3

approximately twice the radiodensity of dentin and aluminum.
To claim that a composite is radiopaque, the American Dental
Association requires commercial dental restorative resins to have a
radiopacity at least equal to that of aluminum. To be adequately
detectable on medical chest x-ray images, a denture resin fragment
of 2 mm should have a radiopacity equal to or greater than that of
0.2 mm of copper. This requires the resin to have sufficient additive
to produce a radiopacity about three times that of aluminum.

Thermal Properties
When restorative materials are placed in deep cavities, the heat
transmitted to vital dental pulp must be limited so as to prevent
thermal shock and trauma. In other circumstances, as with denture
bases in contact with mucosal surfaces, the transmission of a certain
amount of thermal energy is desirable to convey the sensations of
heat and cold associated with food and beverages. Such attributes
are governed by the properties of thermal conductivity and thermal
diffusivity. Another category of thermal behavior is the expansion
when heated and contraction when cooled. If, for example, a dental
restoration expands and contracts at a rate different from that of the
adjacent hard tissues, marginal failures and leakage can result. This
attribute is governed by the coefficient of thermal expansion.

Thermal Conductivity
Thermal conductivity (κ) is the physical property that governs
heat transfer through a material by conductive flow. The conduction of heat within a solid involves the transfer of thermal energy
from one end of a material to another across a temperature gradient. Thermal conductivity is defined as the quantity of heat in calories per second passing through a material l cm thick with a cross
section of 1 cm2 having a temperature difference of 1 kelvin (K)
(=1 °C) and is measured under steady-state conditions in which
the temperature gradient does not change. The International System (SI) unit or measure for thermal conductivity is watts per
meter per kelvin (W ⋅ m−1 ⋅ K−1). In general, thermal conductivities increase in the following order, although there are exceptions:
polymers < ceramics < metals.
Materials that have a high thermal conductivity are called conductors, whereas materials of low thermal conductivity are called
insulators. The higher is a substance’s thermal conductivity, the
greater is the ability to transmit thermal energy, and vice versa. If
the thermal gradient does not change (i.e., heat is supplied at one
end and withdrawn at the other end at a steady rate), the thermal
conductivity is a measure of the heat transferred.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the difference between thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity,
and why does it matter in dentistry?

Thermal Diffusivity
Thermal diffusivity (h) is a measure of the speed with which a
temperature change will spread through an object when one surface is heated. Thermal diffusivity is calculated from the thermal
conductivity divided by the product of density and heat capacity:

h


,
cp 
(2)

TABLE 3-1

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

57

Density and Thermal Properties of Water,
Enamel, Dentin, and Dental Materials

Material

Density
(g cm−3)

Specific
Heat
(cal g−1 K−1)

Thermal
Conductivity
(W m−1 K−1)

Thermal
Diffusivity
(cm2 s−1)

Water

1.00

1.00

0.44

0.0014

Dentin

2.14

0.30

0.57

0.0018–0.0026

Glass
ionomer

2.13

0.27

0.51–0.72

0.0022

Zinc
phosphate

2.59

0.12

1.05

0.0030

Composite

1.6–2.4

0.20

1.09–1.37

0.0019–0.0073

Enamel

2.97

0.18

0.93

0.0047

Amalgam

11.6

0.005

22.6

0.96

Pure gold

19.3

0.03

297

1.18

where h is thermal diffusivity, κ is thermal conductivity, cp is heat
capacity at constant pressure, and ρ is the temperature-dependent
density in grams per cm3 (cp is numerically equal to the more
commonly used term specific heat, which is the quantity of heat
needed to raise the temperature of a unit mass by 1 K).
A material with a high density and high specific heat will likely
have a low thermal diffusivity. Such a material changes temperature
very slowly. Low heat capacity and high thermal conductivity lead
to high diffusivity, and temperature changes transmit rapidly
through the material. As shown in Table 3-1, gold has about onetenth the heat capacity of dentin, about 500 times the thermal
conductivity, and about 600 times the thermal diffusivity. Thus
a pure gold filling would provide the tooth pulp with very little
protection against thermal shock compared with natural dentin.
The thermal conductivities and thermal diffusivities of cementing
materials (glass ionomer, zinc phosphate, and composite) compare
favorably with enamel and dentin, in contrast with the markedly
higher values for metallic restorative materials. Thus, when the
remaining dentin between the cavity and the pulp is too thin to
provide sufficient thermal protection, an additional layer of an
insulating base material, such as the dental cements discussed in
Chapter 7, Pulp Protection, should be placed.
During ingestion of hot foods and liquids, the thermal
diffusivity reflects the thermal energy retained by the dental
restorative material, whereas the thermal conductivity dictates
how much thermal energy passes through this material. Because
the rapid temperature changes last a short duration, the thermal
energy passed could be negligible, whereas the energy retained by
the material keeps the material at a higher temperature after the
hot food has passed. Therefore thermal diffusivity plays a more
important role than thermal conductivity clinically.

Coefficient of Thermal Expansion
When materials undergo a temperature increase, the vibrational
motion of atoms and mean interatomic (bond) distances increase.
This results in an increase in volume or an expansion of the material. The increase is described by the coefficient of thermal expansion, α, which is defined as the change in length per unit of the
original length of a material when the temperature of this material

58

PA RT I

TABLE 3-2

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Coefficients of Thermal Expansion (α)
of Dental Materials Compared With
Those of Tooth Enamel and Dentin

restorations. Consider a porcelain veneer that is fired to a metal
substrate (coping). The veneer may contract to a greater extent than
the metal during cooling and induce tangential tensile stresses or tensile
hoop (circumferential) tensile stresses in the porcelain, which may cause
immediate or delayed crack formation. Although these thermal stresses
cannot be eliminated completely, they can be reduced appreciably by
the selection of materials whose expansion or contraction coefficients
are matched fairly closely (within 4%). This is discussed more fully in
Chapter 10, Bonding Porcelain to Metal, on ceramics.

α (ppm K−1)

α material/α tooth
enamel

Aluminous porcelain

6.6

0.58

Dentin

8.3

0.75

Commercially pure titanium

8.5

0.77

Type II glass ionomer

11.0

0.96

Tooth enamel

11.4

1.00

Gold-palladium alloy

13.5

1.18

Gold (pure)

14.0

1.23

Electrochemical Properties

Palladium-silver alloy

14.8

1.30

Amalgam

25.0

2.19

Dental composite

14–50

1.2–4.4

Denture resin

81.0

7.11

Pit and fissure sealant

85.0

7.46

Inlay wax

400.0

35.1

Metals undergo chemical reactions with nonmetallic elements in the
environment to produce chemical compounds. This process is known
as corrosion, which in most cases causes deterioration of the metal surface. Dentistry uses a wide variety of metals for restorations and prosthetic devices; successful clinical performance and long-term durability
require adequate corrosion resistance of these materials in the oral environment. Many of the most commonly used metals derive little or
no protection from the corrosion products that form under normal
circumstances, which is unfortunate. The rusting of iron is a familiar
example of the effects that may be produced by such a process. Gold
and platinum group metals, which include ruthenium, rhodium, palladium, osmium, iridium, and platinum, resist chemical attack of this
nature very well and are therefore called noble metals. Gold, palladium,
and platinum are commonly used as dental alloys.
The oral environment is highly conducive to electrochemical
action. This environment is warm, moist, and subjected to wide
fluctuations in temperature and pH. Thus an understanding
of corrosion and the underlying electrochemical properties is
essential to control electrochemical effects and thereby minimize
corrosion and corrosion-induced problems in dentistry.

Material

is raised 1 K (see the discussion of thermal energy in Chapter 2,
Influence of Interatomic Bond):


L
,
L  T
(3)

where L is the original length, ΔL is the change in length, and
ΔT is the temperature change. Values for α of some materials
of interest in dentistry are presented in Table 3-2. The units are
typically expressed as either mm/m/K or ppm/K.
This parameter is extremely important in dental applications as
broad ranging as producing cast restorations that fit and maintaining
the seal of a restoration margin. The influence of this property often
dictates the procedures that have been developed for using wax patterns, casting metal crowns, placing amalgam and composite resin
restorations, and preparing metal-ceramic crowns and bridges. A
tooth restoration may expand or contract more than the tooth during
a change in temperature; thus there may be marginal microleakage
adjacent to the restoration, or the restoration may debond from the
tooth. According to the values in Table 3-2, direct restorative materials
may experience changes in dimension of up to 4.4 times those of
tooth enamel for every degree of temperature change.
The high thermal expansion coefficient of inlay wax is also important because wax is highly susceptible to temperature changes. For
example, an accurate wax pattern that fits a prepared tooth contracts
significantly when the wax pattern is removed from the tooth or a
die in a warmer area, and then stored in a cooler area. This dimensional change is transferred to a cast metal restoration that is made
by the lost wax process. Similarly, denture teeth that have been set
in denture base wax in a relatively warm laboratory may shift appreciably in their simulated intraoral positions after the denture base is
moved to a cooler room before processing of the denture.
Thermal stresses produced from thermal expansion or contraction
differences are also important in the production of metal-ceramic

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which factors in the oral environment promote the corrosion of metallic
dental restorations and prostheses?

Tarnish and Corrosion
A differentiation should be made between tarnish and corrosion.
Even though there is a definite technical difference, clinically
distinguishing between the two phenomena is difficult, and the
terms are often used interchangeably in the dental literature.
Tarnish is a surface discoloration on a metal or a slight loss or
alteration of the surface finish or luster. In the oral environment,
tarnish often occurs from the formation of deposits or thin films,
such as oxides, sulfides, or chlorides, on the surface of a restoration. Tarnish is often an early indication and precursor of
corrosion. For example, eggs and certain other foods contain significant amounts of sulfur. Various sulfides, such as hydrogen or
ammonium sulfide, initiate tarnish and eventually corrode silver,
copper, tin, mercury, and other metals present in their alloys.
Corrosion is a process whereby deterioration of a metal is caused
by a reaction with the environment. In due course, corrosion can
cause severe and catastrophic disintegration of metals. Even if highly
localized, corrosion may cause mechanical failure of a structure, the
actual volume of material lost is quite small. Corrosive disintegration
can take place through exposure to atmosphere or immersion in
acid, alkaline, or certain chemical solutions. Keep in mind that
saliva is an electrolyte, which is conducive to the corrosion of
metallic restorations.

CHAPTER 3

Ammeter

Classifications of Corrosion
There are two general classifications of corrosion reactions: chemical
corrosion and electrochemical corrosion. In chemical corrosion, there
is a direct combination of metallic and nonmetallic elements.
Corrosion occurs because the most commonly used metals and
alloys are not in their lowest-energy state (thermodynamically the
most stable state). For example, iron (Fe) is extracted from various
iron oxides. Similarly, aluminum is extracted from aluminum
oxide (Al2O3), and copper from copper sulfide (CuS). Oxidized
compounds such as Fe3O4, Al2O3, and CuS are thermodynamically
stable and consequently occur in nature in these fully reacted
forms. Thus pure metals spontaneously convert from a highly
reactive state to their lowest-energy oxidized state by reacting
with oxygen, sulfur, or chlorine. Another good example is the
discoloration of silver by sulfur. Such a reaction is also referred to
as “dry” corrosion because this reaction occurs in the absence of
water or other fluid electrolytes. Notice that metals lose electrons
in the corrosion process. Ceramics do not corrode by the loss of
electrons because they are already fully oxidized and are in their
lowest-energy states. However, the glass phase of ceramics can
dissolve in acidic and basic media. Noble metals are unique; they
do not form stable oxides at room temperature.
Electrochemical corrosion, also known as galvanic corrosion,
requires the presence of water or some other fluid electrolyte and
a pathway for the transport of electrons (i.e., an electrical current).
This type of corrosion is also referred to as wet corrosion because a
fluid electrolyte is required. Electrochemical corrosion is seldom
isolated and almost invariably accompanied by chemical corrosion. However, the electrochemical mode of corrosion is more
important for dental materials and is the focus in this chapter.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which mechanisms of electrochemical corrosion are possible for metallic
dental restorations and prostheses?

Electrochemical Mechanism of Corrosion
When a metal is immersed in a fluid electrolyte, the chemical
potential causes enough ions to dissolve to form a saturated solution and produce an equal number of free electrons. The loss of
electrons by a metal is known as oxidation and is the initial electrochemical event in the corrosion process. The ease with which a
metal gives up electrons in solution and oxidizes can be expressed
in terms of the oxidation potential. When a second metal of different composition is placed in the same solution, the second metal
will then compete with the first metal to dissolve in the solution.
If the two metals are connected with an external circuit, they form
an electrochemical cell, as illustrated schematically in Figure 3-10.
The metal having a greater oxidation potential than the other
metal will be the one that releases positive ions (M+) with the production of free electrons, as illustrated by the following anodic/
oxidation reaction:
M0 → M + + e − .
(4)
This metal is also called an anode, indicating the metal surface is
undergoing an oxidation reaction and is corroding. Once the solution
is saturated with metal ions from anode, reduction reactions occur
at the other metal surface, which is called a cathode, where the free

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

59

External
connector

Amalgam
anode

Gold alloy
cathode

Saliva
Electrolyte

• Figure 3-10 Diagram of an electrochemical cell consisting of a simulated amalgam anode, a gold alloy cathode, and saliva as the electrolyte.

electrons produced from the anode are consumed and metal ions from
the saturated solution are deposited. For example, metal ions may
be removed from the solution to form metal atoms (reaction 4), as
occurs in metal plating; hydrogen ions may be converted to hydrogen
gas (reaction 5); or hydroxyl ions may be formed (reaction 6):
M + + e − → M0 ,
(5)
2H+ + 2e − → H2 ↑,
(6)
2H2 O  O2  4e   4(OH) .

(7)
In summary, an electrochemical cell is composed of four essential components: an anode, a cathode, an external circuit, and an
electrolyte. Both the anode and cathode are called electrodes. The
electrolyte supplies the ions needed at the cathode by dissolving
metal ions at the anode. The external circuit serves as a conduction path to carry electrons from the anode to the cathode because
there is a difference in electrical potential that can be measured,
which is known as voltage (V). This simple electrolytic cell is, in
principle, a battery because the flow of electrons in the external
circuit is capable of lighting a light bulb in a flashlight or producing a physiological sensation (i.e., pain).
In order for electrochemical corrosion to be an ongoing process, the production of electrons by the oxidation reactions at the
anode must be exactly balanced by the consumption of electrons
in the reduction reactions at the cathode. Often the cathodic reactions are considered to be the primary driving force for electrochemical corrosion. We will find in later discussions that keeping
a reaction from happening at the cathode is recommended to
reduce or eliminate corrosion.
Different metals have different tendencies for oxidation because
of their differences in electronic structure; this tendency to oxidize
(ionize) is measured by the electrode potential, expressed in volts or
millivolts. To measure the electrode potential of any material is to
determine the voltage difference between the metal and a standard
hydrogen electrode in water at 25 °C. The potential of hydrogen
electrode is arbitrarily designated as zero potential; therefore the

60

PA RT I

TABLE 3-3

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Electromotive Series of the Metals

Metal

Ion

Electrode Potential (V)

Gold

Au+

+1.50

Gold

Au3+

+1.36

Platinum

Pt2+

+0.86

Palladium

2+

+0.82

Hg

2+

+0.80

+

+0.80

Copper

Cu

+

+0.47

Bismuth

Bi3+

+0.23

Antimony

Sb3+

+0.10

Hydrogen

H+

−0.00

Lead

Pb2+

−0.12

2+

−0.14

Nickel

2+

Ni

−0.23

Cadmium

Cd2+

−0.40

Iron

Fe2+

−0.44

Chromium

Cr2+

−0.56

Zinc

Zn2+

−0.76

Aluminum

Al3+

−1.70

+

−2.71

2+

−2.87

Mercury
Silver

Tin

Sodium
Calcium
Potassium

Pd

Ag

Sn

Na
Ca
K

+

−2.92

voltage difference measured is the electrode potential of the metal
being measured. Similar measurements for the elements that are
useful to the dentist yields the values that are arranged by their
equilibrium values of electrode potential in Table 3-3, which is
known as the electromotive (or galvanic) series. The sign of the
electrode potential in Table 3-3 indicates the polarity in such a
cell. Elements with a higher positive value have a lower tendency
to dissolve and are therefore more resistant to becoming oxidized
and corroded in aqueous environments. The more negative the
electrode potential, the easier it is for any particular metal to ionize
and oxidize and the more susceptible it is to tarnish and corrosion.
If two pure metals are immersed in an electrolyte and connected by an electrical conductor to form a galvanic cell, the metal
with the more negative electrode potential in Table 3-3 becomes
the anode and undergoes oxidation; that is, the ions of this metal
go into solution. As an example, in a galvanic cell composed of
copper (−0.46 V) and zinc (−0.76 V) electrodes in an aqueous
acidic solution, the zinc electrode becomes the anode and undergoes surface dissolution.
In general, the relative position of any element in the electromotive series depends not only on this element’s inherent dissolution
tendencies but also on the ionic concentration in the electrolyte. As
the ionic concentration increases, the tendency for that element to dissolve decreases. Thus an increase in metal ion content may eventually
prevent further corrosion because the metal’s ions have saturated the

immediate environment. However, this would be unusual for metallic
dental materials because dissolved ions are continually removed by
food, fluids, and tooth brushing. Thus corrosion in the mouth is
typically an ongoing process. Many types of electrochemical corrosion
are possible in the oral environment because saliva, with the salts it
contains, is a weak electrolyte. The electrochemical properties of saliva
depend on the concentrations of components, pH, surface tension, and
buffering capacity. Each of these factors may influence the strength of
any electrolyte. Thus the magnitude of the resulting corrosion process
will be controlled by these variables.
In an environment in which a metal is corroding, both anodic
and cathodic reactions take place simultaneously on the surface
of the metal. Metal ions go into solution because of the anodic
reactions, and other ions are reduced in the cathodic reactions.
These two reactions may occur at randomly distributed sites on
the metal surface, or more frequently, there are anodic areas at
which mostly the metal dissolves and cathodic areas at which
mostly other ions are discharged. Several forms of electrochemical
corrosion discussed next are based on the mechanisms that produce these inhomogeneous areas.

Dissimilar Metals
An important type of electrochemical reaction occurs when
combinations of dissimilar metals are in direct physical contact.
Here, the dental reference is two adjacent metal restorations where
the metal surfaces are chemically dissimilar. The alloy combinations
that may produce galvanic corrosion or electrogalvanism through
the flow of galvanic currents may be in either continuous or
intermittent contact. An example would be a dental amalgam
restoration placed on the occlusal surface of a tooth directly
opposing a gold inlay. Because both restorations are wet with saliva,
an electrical circuit exists with a difference in potential between the
dissimilar restorations (Figure 3-11). When the two restorations
are brought into contact, there is a sudden short-circuit through
the two alloys. This can result in a sharp pain, called galvanic
shock, which is well known in dentistry. An undetected piece of
aluminum foil in a baked potato can produce the same effect with
a metallic restoration during chewing.

Tissue
fluid

Saliva

Tissue
fluid

• Figure 3-11 Possible path of a galvanic current in the mouth.

CHAPTER 3

E

• Figure 3-12 Schematic illustration of a single metallic restoration showing two possible current pathways between an external surface exposed
to saliva and an interior surface exposed to dentinal fluid. Because the
dentinal fluid contains a higher Cl− concentration than saliva, it is assumed
that the electrode potential of the interior surface exposed to dentinal fluid
is more active; it is therefore given a negative sign (−). The potential difference between the two surfaces is represented by E.

A current is present even in a single isolated metallic restoration,
although this is less intense. In this situation, the electrochemical
cell is generated as a result of the electrical potential differences
created by the two electrolytes: saliva and tissue fluids. The term
tissue fluid is used to denote the dentinal fluid, soft tissue fluid,
and blood that provide the means for completing the external
circuit. Because the chloride ion concentration of dentinal fluid is
seven times higher than that of saliva, there is an assumption that
the interior surfaces of a dental restoration exposed to dentinal
fluid will have a more active electrochemical potential. Possible
current pathways are diagrammed in Figure 3-12.

Heterogeneous Surface Composition
Another type of galvanic corrosion is associated with the heterogeneous composition of the surfaces of dental alloys, whose
microstructures have been described in Chapter 2, Liquid-to-Solid
Transformation of Cast Metals. Commercial dental alloys generally contain more than three elements, and they can have complex
microstructures that result in even more heterogeneous surface
compositions. For example, when an alloy containing a two-phase
eutectic microstructural constituent is immersed in an electrolyte,
the lamellae of the phase (Figure 2-18) with the more negative electrode potential are attacked, and corrosion results.
In an alloy that is a single-phase solid solution, any cored
structure is less resistant to corrosion than is the homogenized
solid solution because of differences in electrode potential caused
by microsegregation and variations in composition between
individual microstructural elements (Chapter 2, Coring and
Homogenization Heat Treatment). Even a homogenized solid
solution is susceptible to corrosion at the grain boundaries,
which are anodic to the cathodic grain interiors, because atomic
arrangements at the grain boundaries are less regular and have
higher energies (Chapter 2, Liquid-to-Solid Transformation of
Cast Metals). Solder joints between dental alloys also corrode

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

61

because of differences in the compositions of the alloy and solder
(Chapter 9, Joining of Dental Alloys).
Impurities in alloys enhance corrosion, and these impurities
are typically segregated at the grain boundaries, as described in
Chapter 2, Liquid-to-Solid Transformation of Cast Metals. Mercury
impurities that can inadvertently contaminate gold alloys during
handling by dental personnel have electrode potentials different
from those of the bulk grains of the gold alloys. Finally, it follows
from the preceding discussion that nominally pure metals, which
do not contain significant quantities of impurities or secondary
microstructural phases acting as miniature electrodes with different
potentials, corrode at much slower rates than alloys do.

Stress Corrosion
Because the imposition of stress increases the internal energy of an
alloy, either through the elastic displacements of atoms or the creation of microstrain fields associated with dislocations (when
permanent deformation occurs, as described in Chapter 9,
Dislocation Movement in Polycrystalline Alloys), the tendency to
undergo corrosion will be increased. For most metallic dental
appliances, the deleterious effects of stress and corrosion, called
stress corrosion, are most likely to occur during fatigue or cyclic
loading in the oral environment. Thus any adjustment of the alloy
by bending, burnishing, or malleting causes localized permanent
deformation in some parts of the appliance. This adjustment results
in the creation of electrochemical cells, which consist of the more
deformed metal regions (anodic), saliva, and the not so deformed
or less deformed metal regions (cathodic), wherein the deformed
regions will undergo corrosion attack. This is one reason excessive
burnishing of the margins of metallic restorations is contraindicated.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can a small pit in the surface of a metallic restoration or a gap
between a metal restoration and a tooth become susceptible to and sustain
aggressive, localized corrosive attack?

Concentration Cell Corrosion

An important type of electrochemical corrosion is called concentration cell corrosion, which occurs whenever there are variations
in the electrolytes or in the composition of the given electrolyte
within the system. When surface irregularities, such as pits,
scratches, and cracks, in restoration surfaces are covered with saliva,
the saliva around the rim of the irregularities being exposed to the
atmosphere will be richer in oxygen concentration relative to the
saliva at the bottom of the irregularities. Recall reaction 7 that
occurs at the cathode of an electrochemical cell where the areas
around the rim are likely to become the cathode and begin to draw
electrons from oxygen-poor regions, such as the bottom of the
irregularities, to complete the reaction (Figure 3-13). Consequently,
metal atoms at the base of the pit ionize (i.e., reaction 4) and go
into solution to generate the electrons needed, causing the pit to
deepen. Thus to protect against such pitting corrosion, all metallic
dental restorative materials should be polished. A closely related
category of concentration cell corrosion is “crevice corrosion,” in
which preferential attack occurs at the crevices and marginal gaps of
crowns, bridges, and cavity restorations because of the presence of
food debris and other deposits.
There are often accumulations of food debris in the interproximal
areas of the mouth, particularly if oral hygiene is poor. This debris
then produces one type of electrolyte in that area, and the normal
saliva provides another electrolyte at the occlusal surface. Therefore

62

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

2H2O + O2 + 4e-

4(OH)-

Electrolyte

e-

e-

• Figure 3-13 A pit on a dental alloy as a corrosion cell. The region at the
bottom of the pit is an anode, and the surface around the rim of the pit is
the cathode. The metallic ions flow from the bottom to the rim through the
electrolyte, and the electrons flow through the metal to the rim.

electrolytic corrosion occurs with preferential attack of the metal
surface occurring underneath the layer of food debris. There is also the
possibility that the region covered by the debris or plaque is oxygenpoor and becomes anodic relative to the rest of the restoration.
Seldom are any one of the preceding types of electrochemical
corrosion found alone. Generally, two or more types act simultaneously, thereby compounding the problem. This phenomenon can
be illustrated by considering the dissimilar metal corrosion between
a cast gold inlay and an amalgam restoration. Because surface
deposits can form during this type of electrochemical corrosion,
differences in oxygen concentration will arise. Moreover, if the corrosion product layer is incomplete or porous, as is usually the case
with metallic dental restorations, the resulting inhomogeneous surface will produce new electrochemical cells for continued corrosion.
Obviously, good oral hygiene helps to prevent the accumulation of
surface deposits and is thus essential for minimizing corrosion.

Protection Against Corrosion
Gold coating is employed to enhance the appearance of many
commercial nondental products. However, when the gold coating
becomes scratched or pitted to a depth where the substrate metal
is exposed, the metal corrodes at a very rapid rate because of concentration cells and dissimilar metals in contact. Attempts to use
metallic and nonmetallic coatings to provide corrosion protection
for dental alloys have generally been ineffective because such coatings were too thin, incomplete, not adherent to the underlying
metal, readily scratched, or attacked by oral fluids.
However, when two dissimilar metals are in contact, paint or
another nonconductive film can be used to minimize corrosion if
this is applied to the more noble metal between the two involved.
Should a scratch occur on the protective film, the exposed cathode
area is very small and can be filled quickly by the corrosion product
from the anode, which effectively isolates the cathode.
A highly effective protection uses certain metals that develop a thin,
adherent, highly protective film by reaction with the environment;
such a metal is said to be passive. The most common example is
stainless steel, which contains sufficient amounts of chromium added
to passivate the alloy with chromium oxides. The same principle
is used in dental alloys not based on noble metals, as described in
Chapter 9, Classification of Dental Casting Alloys. Tensile stress
and certain ions, such as chlorine ions, can disrupt the protective
oxide film, leading to rapid corrosion. Therefore patients should be
warned against using household bleaches for cleaning partial denture
frameworks or removable orthodontic appliances that are alloyed

with chromium. Titanium (Ti) also forms a passivating titanium
oxide film, which is of interest because both commercially pure Ti
and alloys in which Ti is a major component are used for a variety
of dental applications, such as cast restorations, orthodontic wires,
endodontic instruments, and implants discussed in Chapters 9 and
12. Titanium and Ti alloys are widely used in dentistry because of
their favorable combination of chemical, physical, and biological
properties and their resistance to corrosion. Their consequent
biocompatibility is among their major advantages. Nevertheless,
corrosion can occur, and the long-term accumulation of corrosion
products can lead to fractures of the alloy–implant interface, implant
abutment, or implant body. The combination of stress, corrosion, and
bacteria contributes to implant failure.
Noble metals resist corrosion because their electromotive force
is positive with regard to any of the common reduction reactions
found in the oral environment. To corrode a noble metal under
such conditions, an external current (overpotential) is required. A
guideline that has been employed by the manufacturers of many
dental alloys is that at least half the atoms should be noble metals
(gold, platinum, and palladium) to ensure against corrosion. Palladium has been found to be effective in reducing the susceptibility to sulfide tarnishing for alloys containing silver. If noble metals
are used to avoid corrosion, it is important that the more active
constituents of the alloy be uniformly dispersed in a random solid
solution because the formation of a second phase that is enriched
in an active metal will produce a galvanic corrosion cell.

Clinical Significance of Galvanic Currents
Small galvanic currents associated with electrogalvanism are known
to be continually present in the mouth, promoting corrosion, as discussed earlier. As long as metallic restorative materials are employed,
the elimination of these galvanic currents is unlikely. Although postoperative pain caused by galvanic shock is not common, this can be
a source of discomfort to an occasional patient. However, such postoperative pain usually occurs immediately after the insertion of a
new restoration and generally subsides and disappears in a few days.
The primary factor responsible for the pain resulting from this current flow is likely the physiological condition of the tooth. Once the
tooth has recovered from the injury of preparing the cavity and has
returned to a more normal physiological condition, the current flow
produces no response. The most practical method for reducing or
eliminating galvanic shock is a varnish coating on the surface of the
metallic restoration. As long as the varnish remains, the restoration
is insulated from saliva, and no electrochemical cell is established.
By the time the varnish has worn away, the pulp has usually healed
sufficiently such that no pain persists.
The balance of evidence shows that galvanic currents are
deleterious only from the standpoint of patient discomfort—and
even then, only rarely. Nevertheless, dentists should avoid clinical
procedures that exacerbate the condition, such as insertion of
an amalgam restoration directly in contact with a gold crown.
Mercury released from the corroding amalgam (the anode) may
interact with the gold alloy (the cathode) and weaken the amalgam
restoration. A discoloration of both restorations may also occur,
and often a metallic taste develops that can persist indefinitely.

Magnetic Materials
Magnetic materials are ubiquitous, being found in a wide range
of everyday items, from magnetic bulletin boards to compasses
to electrical generators. In dentistry, they are primarily used for

CHAPTER 3

retention of implant-borne prostheses and for orthodontic tooth
movement. The force that magnets deliver is biologically safe and
can be directed and exerted both within the mouth and through
soft and hard tissues.
Magnetism occurs in nature in magnetite, a magnetic iron
oxide, and in the synthetic alloys aluminium-nickel-cobalt
(AlNiCo), platinum-cobalt (PtCo), samarium-cobalt (SmCo),
and neodymium-iron-boron (NdFeB). Magnetism develops
from circulating electrical currents. In magnetic materials, the
circulation is caused by electrons orbiting within the atoms. In
most materials the magnetic effects among the electrons cancel
out, but in iron and the alloys just mentioned, a net magnetic
field is induced when the atoms are properly aligned. This alignment produces a magnetic field, which emerges from one pole
(north pole) and returns to the other (south) pole. A magnetic
field induces changes in the surrounding medium in proportion to flux density, the unit of which is the tesla (T), and the
flux density is proportional to the size of the magnet. Attraction or repulsion between two magnets is dependent on their
pole orientation and is inversely proportional to the square of
the distance between them. These properties result in a dramatic
reduction in attractive or repulsive force when magnets are not
optimally aligned and not in close proximity.
A major shortcoming of magnets is their susceptibility to
corrosion and need to be protected by a highly durable coating.
Another problem is the loss of magnetic flux over time or in the
presence of elevated temperatures. In dentistry, the magnetic materials used generate a constant field that is permanent at mouth
temperatures. However, heating to relatively modest temperatures
can cause irreversible magnetic loss. For example, this can occur
in applications where magnets are embedded in acrylic appliances
that, during curing, reach temperatures of 80 °C to 90 °C from the
exothermic setting reaction of the methyl-methacrylate resin (see
Chapter 11, Temperature Rise).
Within their range of current dental uses, magnets and static
magnetic fields have been found to be biologically safe if the
flux is less than 40 mT, according to the guidelines of the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection
and the World Health Organization. According to these organizations, vertigo and nausea are experienced when the head
moves rapidly in a field greater than 2 T, as might occur during
medical magnetic resonance imaging. These symptoms derive
from the disturbance of vestibular function by induced current in the central nervous system. There is little evidence of
other effects, including carcinogenesis, although experimental
data are still sparse. Magnetic fields developed near the gingiva by magnetic attachments for removable partial dentures
have been reported to be well below 40 mT—in the 10- to
15-mT range.

Physical and Chemical Properties of Solids

63

Selected Readings
Barna GJ, Taylor JW, King GE, et al: The influence of selected light
intensities on color perception within the color range of natural teeth,
J Prosthet Dent 46:450–453, 1981.
Based on a study of the influence of light intensity on the ability to
discriminate color differences within the color range of natural teeth.
A significant number of the dentists in the study were found to be
color-deficient. In such instances, the dentist should obtain assistance
when matching tooth shades.
Berzins DW, Kawashima I, Graves R, et al: Electrochemical characteristics of
high-Pd alloys in relation to Pd-allergy, Dent Mater 16:266–273, 2000.
In vitro electrochemical evaluations of a variety of palladiumcontaining alloys provide insight into the mechanism of palladium
allergy for some patients.
Calamia JR, Trushkowsky RD, Wolff MS, editors: Successful esthetic and
cosmetic dentistry for the modern dental practice update 2011, Dent
Clin N Am 55:187–418, 2011.
Presents the clinical steps needed to achieve predictable esthetic color
management.
Chaturvedi TP: An overview of the corrosion aspect of dental implants
(titanium and its alloys), Indian J Dent Res 20:91–98, 2009.
Chrcanovic B, de Souza LN: Tracheotomy for a foreign body in the larynx, Oral Maxillofac Surg 13:55–58, 2009.
Shows radiograph of a swallowed partial denture. Such inadvertently
swallowed foreign objects can be immediately life-threatening and
must be adequately radiopaque to safely determine and direct removal.
Goodacre CJ, Paravina RD, Bergen SF, et al: A contemporary guide to
color and shade selection for prosthodontists, American College of
Prosthodontists 2009. [Educational DVD.]
Megremis S, Carey CM: Corrosion and Tarnish of Dental Alloys, ASM
Handbook, Metals Park, OH, 2006, American Society for Metals Int,
pp. 891–921.
This article describes dental alloy compositions and their properties. It
discusses the safety and efficacy considerations of dental alloy devices.
The article defines and compares interstitial fluid and oral fluid environments. Also, the effects of restoration contact on electrochemical
parameters are examined, and the concentration of cells developed
by dental alloy-environment electrochemical reactions are reviewed.
Paravina Rade D: Dental Color Matcher/an online education and training program for esthetic dentistry. http://www.scadent.org/news/free
-color-training.
This online CE course presents a novel approach to practical shade
matching and advanced esthetics.
Upadhyay D, Panchal MA, Dbey RS, et al: Corrosion of alloys used in
dentistry: A review, Mater Sci Eng A 432:1–11, 2006.
Yuan JC-C, Brewer JD, Monaco EA, et al: Defining a natural tooth color
space based on a 3-dimensional shade system, J Prosthet Dent 98:110–
119, 2007.
Not all commercial shade guides cover all the areas of value, hue, and
chroma present in human tooth structure. These articles analyze and
present examples of this problem.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Physical Properties
Chrcanovic B, de Souza LN: Tracheotomy for a foreign body in the
larynx, Oral Maxillofac Surg 13:55–58, 2009.
Shows radiograph of a swallowed partial denture. Such inadvertently
swallowed foreign objects can be immediately life-threatening and
must be adequately radiopaque to safely determine and direct removal.
Haidary A, Leider JS, Silbergleit R: Unsuspected swallowing of a partial
denture, Am J Neuroradiol 28:1734–1735, 2007.
A recent case report of a swallowed partial denture lodged in the hypopharynx and upper esophagus. The subtle imaging appearance and difficulty of detection and location of the swallowed denture is discussed.
Color and Optical Effects
American Dental Association: Dental product spotlight: Dental shade
guides, J Am Dent Assoc 133:366–367, 2002.
American Dental Association: Esthetic dentistry: A new direction, J Am
Dent Assoc 115(special issue):3E–112E, 1987.
This is a series of papers covering the many facets of selecting materials
and clinical procedures used in esthetic dentistry. Depicted are the
improved services available through bonding technology, with
particular emphasis on the organization of color in the design and
fabrication of restorative materials.
Antonson SA, Anusavice KJ: Contrast ratio of veneering and core ceramics
as a function of thickness, Int J Prosthodont 14:316–320, 2001.
Barna GJ, Taylor JW, King GE, et al: The influence of selected light
intensities on color perception within the color range of natural
teeth, J Prosthet Dent 46:450–453, 1981.
Based on a study of the influence of light intensity on the ability to
discriminate color differences within the color range of natural teeth.
A significant number of the dentists in the study were found to be
color-deficient. In such instances, the dentist should obtain assistance
when matching tooth shades.
Calamia JR, Trushkowsky RD, Wolff MS, editors: Successful esthetic
and cosmetic dentistry for the modern dental practice: Update
2011, Dent Clin N Am 55:187–418, 2011.
Presents the clinical steps needed to achieve predictable esthetic color
management.
Chu S, Devigus A, Mieleszko A: The Fundamentals of Color: Shade
Matching and Communication in Esthetic Dentistry, Carol Steam, IL,
2004, Quintessence.
Cleland TM: The Munsell color system. A practical description with
suggestions for its use. http://www.applepainter.com.
An especially useful explanation of complementary colors is given in
Chapter 5.
Goodacre CJ, Paravina RD, Bergen SF, et al: A contemporary guide to
color and shade selection for prosthodontists, American College of
Prosthodontists, 2009. [Educational DVD.]

McLean JW: The science and art of ceramics. Vol. 1: The nature of dental ceramics
and their clinical use1, Amador City, CA, 1979, Quintessence.
For those interested in an in-depth discussion of principles of color as
related to dental ceramics, basic fundamentals are clearly interwoven
with clinical procedures.
Paravina Rade D: Dental Color Matcher/an online education and training program for esthetic dentistry. http://www.scadent.org/news
/free-color-training.
This online CE course presents a novel approach to practical shade
matching and advanced esthetics.
Parker RM: Shade matching for indirect restorations in the esthetic zone,
J Cosmet Dent 23:98–104, 2008.
Yuan JC-C, Brewer JD, Monaco EA, et al: Defining a natural tooth
color space based on a 3-dimensional shade system, J Prosthet
Dent 98:110–119, 2007.
Not all commercial shade guides cover all the areas of value, hue, and
chroma present in human tooth structure. These articles analyze and
present examples of this problem.
Electrochemical Properties
Berzins DW, Kawashima I, Graves R, et al: Electrochemical characteristics
of high-Pd alloys in relation to Pd-allergy, Dent Mater 16:266–273,
2000.
In vitro electrochemical evaluations of a variety of palladiumcontaining alloys provide insight into the mechanism of palladium
allergy for some patients.
Chaturvedi TP: An overview of the corrosion aspect of dental implants
(titanium and its alloys), Indian J Dent Res 20:91–98, 2009.
Marek M: Interactions between dental amalgams and the oral environment, Adv Dent Res 6:100–109, 1992.
A review of corrosion in dental amalgam and its physical, chemical,
and biological consequences.
Megremis S, Carey CM: Corrosion and Tarnish of Dental Alloys, ASM
Handbook, Metals Park, OH, 2006, American Society for Metals Int,
pp. 891–921.
This article describes dental alloy compositions and their properties. It discusses the safety and efficacy considerations of dental alloy
devices. The article defines and compares interstitial fluid and oral
fluid environments. Also, the effects of restoration contact on electrochemical parameters are examined, and the concentration of cells
developed by dental alloy-environment electrochemical reactions are
reviewed.
Upadhyay D, Panchal MA, Dbey RS, et al: Corrosion of alloys used in
dentistry: A review, Mater Sci Eng A 432:1–11, 2006.
Walker RS, Wade AG, Iazzetti G, et al: Galvanic interaction between gold
and amalgam: Effect of zinc, time and surface treatments, J Am Dent
Assoc 134:1463–1467, 2003.

63.e1

4

Mechanical Properties of Solids
OUTLINE
What Are Mechanical Properties?

Properties of Surface Interactions

Stress-Strain Properties

Strength of Tooth Structure

Other Strength Test Methods

Selection of Dental Materials

Fracture of Restorations

KEY TERMS
Brittle Relative inability of a material to deform plastically before
it fractures.
Deformation Change in dimension caused by force application. If
the deformation recovers when the force is removed, it is called
elastic deformation. If deformation does not recover completely
when the force is removed, the amount of deformation that
does not recover is called permanent or plastic deformation.
Ductility The amount of plastic deformation a material can sustain
under tension before fracture. This property is reported quantitatively as percent elongation.
Elastic limit Magnitude of elastic stress above which plastic deformation occurs.
Elastic modulus (also modulus of elasticity and Young’s modulus) Resistance to elastic deformation of a material by force that
is calculated as the ratio of elastic stress to elastic strain.
Fracture toughness The critical stress-intensity factor at the
point of rapid crack propagation in a solid containing a crack of
known shape and size.
Hardness Resistance of the surface of a material to plastic deformation, which is typically produced by forcing a pointed or
spherical indenter on the surface.
Malleability Ability to be hammered or compressed plastically
into thin sheets without fracture.
Pressure Force per unit area acting on the surface of a material.
This is different from stress, which refers to the distribution of
force within the material.
Proportional limit Magnitude of elastic stress below which stress
remains proportional to strain on a stress-strain curve.
Resilience The amount of elastic energy per unit volume that
is sustained on loading and released on unloading of a test
specimen.

Strain Change in dimension per unit initial dimension. In mechanical testing, the change in length is used. There are elastic strain
and plastic strain.
Strain hardening (work hardening) Increase in strength and
hardness and decrease in ductility of a metal that result from
plastic deformation.
Strength (1) Stress at the point the material fractures; depending
on method of loading, there are tensile, compressive, shear, torsional, flexural, and impact strengths. (2) Maximum stress that a
structure can withstand without sustaining a specific amount of
plastic strain; this is known as yield strength or proof stress.
Stress Force per unit area within a structure subjected to a force;
depending on the direction of force relative to the object, there
are tensile, compressive, and shear stresses.
Stress concentration Area or point of significantly higher stress
that occurs because of a structural discontinuity such as a crack
or pore or a marked change in dimension.
Stress intensity (stress intensity factor) Relative increase in
stress at the tip of a crack of given shape and size when the
crack surfaces are displaced in the opening mode (also known
as fracture toughness).
Toughness Ability of a material to absorb elastic energy and
deform plastically before fracturing; measured as the total area
under a plot of tensile stress versus strain.
Tribology The study and application of the principles of friction,
wear, and lubrication.
True stress Ratio of applied force to the actual (true) cross-sectional area; however, for convenience, stress is often calculated
as the ratio of applied force to the initial cross-sectional area.
Yield strength The stress at which a test specimen exhibits a
specific amount of plastic strain.

We learned in Chapter 1, Indirect Restorative Materials, that
partially edentulous patients may receive removable partial
dentures (RPDs) when the construction of a fixed bridge is
not the best treatment option. You will learn later that RPDs
are retained and supported by abutment teeth, to which they
are attached by clasps, which are often made of alloys as the

frameworks (Figure 1-12). Figure 4-1 illustrates the stages of
seating a clasp to an abutment tooth. The dotted patches represent the cross sections of the clasp as it is being seated. The
greatest convexity or bulge, farthest from the axis of the tooth,
is called the height of contour of the tooth. The area that is
recessed relative to the height of the contour of the tooth or

64

CHAPTER 4

recessed relative to any part of the tooth surface is known as the
undercut. The clasp that engages an undercut area on the abutment tooth for the purpose of retention is known as a retentive
clasp. The clasp opposite the retentive clasp, which engages the
surface area occlusal to the height of contour of the tooth, is
known as the reciprocal clasp. Greater than 180° encirclement
of the abutment tooth allows for stabilization of the RPD.
During the insertion of the device, the patient positions the clasps
above their respective abutment teeth (position A in Figure 4-1)
and forces the device to seat completely, which requires the clasp
to traverse. This design means that the retentive clasp arm must
flex open to slide past the height of contour of the tooth (position B in Figure 4-1), and then flexes back to engage the undercut
area (position C in Figure 4-1). Meanwhile, the reciprocal clasp will
properly engage the tooth above the height of contour (position C
in Figure 4-1).
After wearing the device over some period of time, the patient
begins to notice that the RPD is no longer retentive and moves up
and down during chewing. The dentist will recognize that most
likely, the retentive clasp has lost adaptation to the tooth surface
because of deformation, resulting from repeated insertion and
removal followed by chewing on the device. For metallic clasps, the
dentist will use a pair of pliers to adjust the clasp to the original position by bending. The process can be repeated whenever the device
becomes loose again, but there is a limit to the number of times the
clasp can be bent. Eventually, the clasp breaks during adjustment.
This sequence of events illustrates how a material responds to
applied force through changes of configuration. First, the clasp
flexes slightly to slide over the height of contour and returns to the
initial dimension to engage the undercut. A material is an elastic
solid, or is said to behave elastically, when it exhibits the ability
to deform (change in configuration) under an applied force and
regain the original shape and size when the force is removed. When
the clasps become loose because of permanent deformation after a
Reciprical
arm

Clasp

A
Retentive
arm

B
C

A

Height of
contour
Height of
contour
Undercut
Undercut

B

Mechanical Properties of Solids

65

period of service, they are adjusted to restore their original configuration. Plasticity is the ability of solids to change shape permanently
when subjected to forces without rupture, whereas the quantity
of permanent deformation the clasp can sustain before rupture is
known as ductility. This sequence can also be demonstrated by
flexing an orthodontic wire (elastic deformation), bending the wire
further to make a 90° angle (plastic deformation), and bending
back and forth several times at the same bend until the wire breaks.
The focus of this chapter is to describe the mechanical characteristics of these materials and discuss the basic principles behind
these mechanical properties.

What Are Mechanical Properties?
We can perform the same exercises on a series of solid materials
of any size and shape and label them as stiff or flexible, hard or
soft, brittle or ductile, and fragile or tough, based on the materials’
responses. A brittle material is one that fractures without exhibiting
plastic deformation. These descriptions are known as mechanical
properties because they characterize a material’s resistance to elastic deformation, plastic deformation, or fracture under an applied
force. However, these are qualitative terms that do not indicate
how similar or dissimilar materials of the same type may be. To
enable clinicians to select appropriate materials, their mechanical
properties must be defined and quantified. For this purpose, the
direction of force being applied, along with the magnitude of the
force and the area of contact with the material, must be known.
We also need to define the parameters measuring the deformation exhibited by the material and the resistance of the material to
plastic deformation or fracture under a force. The parameters used
for these purposes are stress, strain, and strength.

Stress
Force, as defined in Chapter 1, What Is Force, is the interaction of
one object with another during actions of push or pull, and the
quantity of force is measured using the unit of newton (N). Take
the bending clasp as an example; our hand is one object bending
the clasp (second object) to induce plastic deformation (adjustment) of the clasp. We can treat that action like we apply a force
on an object. Newton’s third law of motion states that when an
external force acts on a solid, a reaction occurs to oppose this force,
which is equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to the external force. That reaction force from the material is the resistance we
feel during the interaction.
In Figure 4-2, A, a block of material weighing 20 kg is hung
to the ceiling by a wire with a cross-sectional area of 7 mm2. The

C

P1

P

P

P‘

P
• Figure 4-1 Stages of removable partial denture (RPD) clasp seating.
Dotted patches represent the cross sections of the clasp arms. The area
recessed relative to the height of the contour is known as the undercut.
A, Before seating. B, The retentive clasp passing the height of contour.
C, Seating completed.

A

P

B

P2

C

• Figure 4-2 Illustration of simple stresses. A, Tensile stress. B, Compressive stress. C, Shear stress. When the load in shear test is not applied
along the wall (hollow arrow), the test is no longer a pure shear stress but
becomes a bending test.

66

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

weight stretches the wire slightly, which generates internal forces
between atoms. The gravitational force exerted on the wire with
a mass of 1 kg is about 9.8 N. We can reasonably assume that the
distribution of the internal forces over the cross section of the wire
is uniform. The stress (σ), by definition, is the exerted force per
unit area perpendicular to the force direction:
20 × 9.8 N
σ=

= 28 × 106 Pa = 28 MPa .

from the post, except that the compressive stress generated within
the supporting material is dispersed beyond the area of contact,
laterally and vertically. The stress is higher under the area of contact
and decreases with distance from the area of contact. This pattern
is known as stress distribution or stress gradient. When a patient bites
a bolus of food between an upper and a lower tooth, both teeth are
exposed to compressive load and undergo compressive stress.

Tensile Stress
Figure 4-2, A shows the mode of tension along the long axis of a
wire where a pair of forces is pulling away along the wire axially.
The two forces are the weight of the block and the reaction force
from the ceiling. The stress generated in the wire is tensile stress
and should be the same throughout the entire wire if the crosssectional area is uniform. You can roll up a sheet of rubber dam
and generate tensile stress within the roll by pulling at both ends.

Shear Stress
When a bar is fixed at one end of a panel (Figure 4-2, C) and downward force perpendicular to the long axis of the bar is applied along
the surface of the panel, there is an upward reaction force from the
panel, which acts on the bottom of the bar. Note that the direction
of the reaction force is opposite to that of the applied force but
not along the same path. This is a characteristic of shear force. The
shear stress of the section of the bar that is experiencing the shear
force is divided by the cross section of the area. In orthodontic
treatment, the wire delivers forces to brackets; the horizontal component of the force relative to the bonded enamel surface will generate shear stress within the bracket and within the resin bonding
cement. Debonding may occur by shear-stress failure of the bonding cement. Debonding of the brackets can also be achieved by
twisting the bracket with orthodontic pliers. This mode of action
is called torsion, where the plier functions as a lever. This action is
the torque that debonds the bracket. Note that the force applied
through the pliers is to rotate the bracket, and the length of the
pliers enhances the tendency to twist the bracket. Therefore, the
tendency is not measured by force but moment, which is the force
multiplied by the length of the pliers. Moment and torque are like
forces that can cause the objects to move; the difference is that they
can be amplified with the help of a longer lever.
If the downward force applied on the bar is away from the
panel, the stress developed within the bar is no longer purely shear
stress but also includes additional tensile and compressive stresses
as the bar bends. More on this phenomenon is discussed in the
section on flexure tests.

Compressive Stress
When the post is resting on a surface, there is a reaction force from
the surface pushing upward (Figure 4-2, B), which illustrates the
mode of compression along the long axis of the post. The stress
generated within the post is known as compressive stress. The contact
area of the supporting surface is also under compressive loading

Combined Stresses
For complex objects, such as three-unit fixed dental prostheses
(FDPs; Figure 4-3, A) and two-unit cantilever FDPs (Figure 4-3, B),
the stresses generated in these devices are different from those in
the simple objects shown in Figure 4-2. As the patient chews, the
masticatory load causes the pontic to bend toward the tissue even

7 × 10−6 m 2

(1)
The International System (SI) unit of stress is N/m2 and is known
as a pascal (Pa). Because the unit of Pa, as defined, is very small,
MPa for megapascal (= 106 pascals) is customarily used. In the
present example, the stress in the wire is 28 MPa in tensile mode.
The weight of the wire is insignificant relative to the force applied
and is usually ignored in the calculation.
When the same block is placed on a supporting post with a
cross-sectional area of 140 mm2 (Figure 4-2, B), calculation shows
that the stress within the post is 1.4 MPa in compression mode.
The force applied at the top of the post divided by the contact area
has the same value as the stress, but this value is known as pressure
(p) because this is the force or load that is exerted on the outer
surface and not within the supporting post.
The stresses developed according to the nature of the applied
forces and the object’s shape are tensile, compressive, and shear
stresses (Figure 4-2).

P

P
Compression

Tension
Compression

Tension

A

B
• Figure 4-3 Types of stresses acting on a fixed dental prosthesis (FDP). A, Stresses induced in a threeunit bridge by a flexural force (P). B, Stresses induced in a two-unit cantilever bridge. Note that the tensile
stress develops on the gingival side of the three-unit bridge and on the occlusal side of the cantilever
bridge.

CHAPTER 4

though the change is not visually detectable. In the three-unit
FDP, the bending causes the pontic to become concave (contract
slightly) and the tissue side to become convex (stretch slightly).
Therefore there is compressive stress on the occlusal side and tensile stress on the tissue side. Both stresses concentrate at the connector because of the smaller cross-sectional area than that of the
pontic. In the case of cantilevered FDPs, the unsupported end will
bend the most, leaving the occlusal surface convex and the tissue
side concave. Therefore there is tensile stress on the occlusal side
and compressive stress on the tissue side. Both stresses will also
concentrate at the connector area. Note that there is a moment
acting on the abutment tooth in the occlusal-gingival direction
that could result in failure of the cement and loosening of the prosthesis. A longer span of the FDP will place more burden on the
cementing medium.
Dental restorations and devices in the oral cavity may be
subjected to tension, compression, shear, torsion, or bending.
The types of stresses developed within the restoration or devices
would likely be a combination of tensile, compressive, and shear
stresses.

Strain
Materials respond to forces through changing shape or dimension.
Deformation resulting from tensile or compressive forces is one
dimension that can be measured directly. The ratio of the change in
length, ΔL, divided by the original length, L0, is the strain (ε) of that
material under a given load. If the wire in Figure 4-2, A is 100 mm
long before loading and increases by 0.5 mm (ΔL = 0.5 mm) when
loaded, the strain is as follows:
0.5 mm
  L 
 0.005  0.5%.
L 0 100 mm
(2)
We can conclude that the wire reaches a stress of 28 MPa
with a tensile strain of 0.5%. When the load is removed, and the
length of wire recovers to 100 mm, the wire exhibits all elastic
strain under the weight. If the wire does not recover completely
when the load is removed and registers a length of 100.2 mm
(ΔL = 0.2 mm), the strain value will be 0.2%, which is the plastic
strain the weight caused. The difference between the two values is
0.3%, which is the maximum elastic strain of the wire. Maximum
elastic strain is also called flexibility and is discussed in detail later
in the chapter.
When we add more weight to the wire until the breaking
point, and the total length of the two broken wires is 101.3 mm
(ΔL = 1.3 mm), this means that the wire sustained 1.3% of plastic
deformation at fracture. Keep in mind that when the wire breaks,
the elastic strain vanishes because there is no stress in either piece
of the wire. The value obtained is also called elongation or ductility. The clinical relevance of this property is discussed later in the
chapter. Note that strain is a dimensionless quantity; units such
as meter per meter or centimeter per centimeter are often used to
remind one of the system of units employed in the actual measurement. The accepted equivalent in the English system is inch per
inch, foot per foot, and so forth.
By now you should realize that whenever there is a stress
applied on a material, the material should exhibit a corresponding
strain. The relationship between stress and strain during the elastic
deformation is the elastic property of the material and is discussed
in detail in the next segment.

Mechanical Properties of Solids

67

Strength
The stress and strain of a material under load was defined earlier.
The challenging nature of the oral cavity, to which dental materials
are subjected, was presented in Chapter 1 (Challenges of Dental Materials in the Oral Cavity). How can it be known if dental
materials can survive in this harsh environment? Clinicians must
use a material and decide on the dimensions of the restoration or
prosthesis in such way that the material will safely withstand various occlusal-loading conditions. For specific dental materials, we
are equally interested in the maximum stress that a structure can
sustain before this material becomes plastically deformed and subsequently fractures. For this purpose, having information regarding the elastic properties and strength characteristics of materials
under various stress conditions, which were discussed earlier, is
imperative. Strength is the stress necessary to cause either a specified amount of plastic deformation (i.e., yield strength) or fracture
(i.e., breaking strength) of the material. The term elastic properties
refers to the stress-strain relationship during elastic deformation.
Hooke’s law of elasticity, also known as Hooke’s law, states that the
stretching of a solid body (e.g., metal, wood) is proportional to
the force applied to this structure when the material behaves elastically. There is, however, a limit for each material, and this linear
relationship is known as the proportional limit. These strength
properties will be discussed in detail, along with their clinical significance, later in the chapter.
Information on the elastic properties and strength of materials can be obtained only through experimental investigations that
use well-defined, well-configured, and standardized specimens,
and subject these to comparatively simple stress conditions. Testing machines are designed to induce certain typical deformations
of test specimens, such as tension, compression, shear, torsion,
and bending (flexure). They also record the forces applied and the
deformation the test specimens can sustain until fracture occurs.
The maximum load recorded before the fracture of the specimen
and the original dimension of the specimen are used to calculate
tensile strength, compressive strength, shear strength, torsional
strength, and flexural strength. For each dental material where
strength values are needed as part of the specification, there are
testing protocols established by TC 106−Dentistry of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). Following these
protocols is important for the standardization of testing methods.
Figure 4-4 shows a material represented by six rows of atoms
under different states of shear stress. The zigzag line indicates the
plane where the movement between rows of atoms would occur
and is called the slip plane. The atoms on either side of the slip
plane are shaded differently for contrast. Figure 4-4, A shows the
relative locations of labeled atoms without stress. When a pair of
forces from opposite directions acts on the top and bottom rows
of the material, thereby subjecting the material to shear forces
(Figure 4-4, B), the positions of the atoms shift in response to
the shear stress generated within the material. Note the change in
position between atoms a and b; atoms 1, 2, and 3; and atoms 4,
5, and 6. The overall change is the elastic shear strain, which will
return to zero when the shear force is removed (Figure 4-4, A). If the
shear force is increased sufficiently to move the atoms in row “a” farther to a new stable position, and then removed, a permanent slip
(plastic deformation) along the slip plane occurs (Figure 4-4, D).
If the pair of forces is applied to the row of atoms directly above
and below the slip plane (Figure 4-2, C), the relative position shift
of atoms a and b will appear similar to the displacement seen in
Figure 4-4, B, but the relative positions of atoms farther above the

68

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

1
2
d

b

2

Slip
plane

3

a

4

1

Shear stress

Shear
force
a

3

b

4

6

A

Shear
force

5

5

6

B

Elastic shear strain
1
Shear
force
d

1

2

Shear stress
a

3

b

4

2
Shear
force

3

a
4

b
5

5
6

C
Elastic shear strain

Plastic
shear
strain

6

D

• Figure 4-4 Atomic model illustrating deformation by shear force. A, No stress. B, Elastic deformation
of the model under shear forces applied along the top and the bottom of the model. C, Elastic deformation
by shear forces along the opposite side of the slip plane; note the difference in the quantity of the elastic
strain by the movement of the atoms relative to that shown in (B). D, Plastic deformation as the atoms have
moved to new positions and the forces are relieved.
slip plane, such as 1, 2, and 3, and atoms farther below the slip
plane, such as 4, 5, and 6, will remain the same (Figure 4-4, C). As
the shear force is increased and then removed when the row of atoms
moves to the next stable position, the arrangement of atoms will
register the same permanent deformation (Figure 4-4, D). Recall
the discussion of moment of force. When the force is applied at a
distance from the interface (Figure 4-4, B), the moment increases;
therefore less force is needed to induce the same plastic deformation. This is the reason most shear tests for bonding systems do not
truly measure shear bond strength.

Stress-Strain Properties
Figure 4-5 shows a stress-strain graph for a stainless-steel orthodontic wire that has been subjected to a tensile force. The solid
orange line shows the stress (σ) obtained from forces divided by
the cross-sectional area as the strain (ε) increases from stretching.
The shape of the curve is typical for a tensile test. As the test begins,
the stress-strain curve moves linearly toward the upper right, then
starts to deviate from a straight line after passing the proportional
limit (PL). The upward or y-axis movement is further reduced as
the graph moves past the yield strength (YS). As the movement
continues farther to the right, the line reaches a plateau at the
ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and eventually breaks at a lower
stress at the breaking strength (BS).
Imagine that we are in control of the tensile testing machine
and observe the stress-strain plot recording in real time on the
screen. Let us stop the experiment before the stress reaches PL and
unload the wire; we will observe that the curve traces back to the
zero stress and strain as the wire completes the elastic recovery to
the original length. The linear segment of the curve is the graphical illustration of Hooke’s law of elasticity. We can restart the test,
and then stop immediately after the stress-strain curve has passed
the proportional limit and unload. We still observe complete elastic recovery of the wire, which indicates that Hooke’s law does not
apply beyond the proportional limit, but the material deformation at that stress level remains elastic only. This process can be
repeated with increasing stress levels and soon reach a point where

2000
1800
UTS

UTS = 1625 MPa

BS

1600
1400

BS = 1570 MPa

YS

YS = 1536 MPa

0.2% Offset

1200
1000

PL = 1018 MPa

PL

Past BS
After UTS

800

E = 192 GPa

PL to UTS
Up to PL

600
400
200
0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

• Figure 4-5 Stress-strain plot for a stainless-steel orthodontic wire that has
been subjected to tension. The proportional limit (PL) is 1020 MPa. Although
not shown, the elastic limit is slightly higher than that value. The yield strength
(YS) at a 0.2% strain offset from the origin (O) is 1536 MPa, and the ultimate
tensile strength (UTS) is 1625 MPa. The breaking strength (BS) is 1570 MPa.
An elastic modulus (E) value of 192 GPa is calculated from the slope of the
elastic region (= PL/ε). Note the shape change of the wire as the tensile test
progresses: the width of the wire contracts, necking after UTS and fracture.
the wire still exhibits elastic recovery but does not revert back to
the original length, thereby exhibiting plastic deformation. Meanwhile, the rate of stress increase with respect to the strain reduces
substantially. Normally, we describe that the stress has exceeded
the elastic limit of the material, which is the stress level when

Stress

CHAPTER 4

Yield point

Mechanical Properties of Solids

69

removed. At this point, the wire has been stressed beyond the
material’s elastic limit, which is the greatest stress to which the
material can be subjected to where the material will return to
the original dimensions when the force is released. The value of
the elastic limit, when available, is used as the yield point of the
material. As discussed earlier, a stress-strain curve, such as that
shown in Figure 4-5, does not show the stress of the elastic limit.
However, for certain materials, experiments have shown that the
stress values of the elastic limit are very close to their respective
proportional limits. For those materials, the use of the values of
the proportional limit as the yield point is customary.

Strain

• Figure 4-6 Yield point of a linear polymer. Note the downturn of the

CRITICAL QUESTION

curve, indicating substantial necking after the material past the yield point.

Yield strength is a commonly reported property for metals and alloys but not
for ceramics. Why is it not possible to measure the yield strength of ceramics
or other purely brittle materials? Use a stress-strain plot to explain your
answer.

plastic deformation occurs. Unfortunately, there is no notable feature on the curve that enables us to identify the stress level of
the elastic limit. To find a convenient and practical substitute, we
commonly draw a line parallel to the straight portion of the curve,
starting at a value of 0.2%, along the strain axis and extend it until
this line intersects with the curve. This stress value is designated
the 0.2% offset yield strength or proof stress. The significance of yield
strength will be discussed later. From this point on, more plastic
deformation of the wire develops after each stretch and unload.
The stress then reaches a maximum value at the ultimate tensile
strength, and the wire begins to show signs of necking, which is a
reduction of the diameter in one area of the wire (specimen illustration in Figure 4-5). As stretching continues, the level of stress
decreases until the wire fractures at the breaking strength, with
all the plastic deformation that occurred after the ultimate tensile
strength concentrating around the area of necking.

Proportional Limit, Elastic Limit, and Yield
Strength (Proof Stress)
When a wire is stretched steadily in tension, the wire eventually
fractures. However, in dentistry, we are also interested in the stress
at which plastic deformation begins to develop, which is called
the yield point. Softer metals and thermoplastic polymers show a
pronounced yield point (Figure 4-6). This occurs at slightly higher
stress levels than the elastic limit. At the yield point, the material shows a sudden increase of strain with no increase in stress.
Materials specific for dental applications do not usually exhibit
this behavior (Figure 4-5); thus a different approach is needed to
determine the yield point.
For a material that satisfies Hooke’s law, the elastic stress must
be directly proportional to the elastic strain. Graphically, the initial region of the stress-strain plot must be a straight line, as shown
in Figure 4-5. In fact, a small portion of the elastic deformation
appears to be nonlinear before the onset of plastic deformation,
which is demonstrated by the curve deviation from the straight
line. The point of deviation is called the proportional limit, which
represents the maximum stress above which stress is no longer proportional to strain.
When a small tensile stress is induced in a wire, the wire will
return to the original length when the load is removed. If the load
is increased progressively in small increments, and then released
after each increase in stress, a stress value will be reached at which
the wire does not return to the original length after the load is

For materials such as stainless steel, a good portion of the elastic deformation appears nonlinear, so the use of the proportional
limit as the yield point is inappropriate. In addition, irregularities along the straight-line region of the stress-versus-strain plot
may represent minor deviations from Hooke’s law and cause some
uncertainty in determining the appropriate point at which the
selected line deviates from linearity (proportional limit). Thus a
different property, yield strength, is used in cases where the proportional limit cannot be determined with sufficient accuracy.
Yield strength is a property that represents the stress value at
which a small amount of plastic strain has occurred. A value of
either 0.1% or 0.2% of the plastic strain is often selected and is
referred to as the percent offset. As in Figure 4-5, the yield strength
for 0.2% offset is illustrated. If yield-strength values for two
materials tested under the same conditions are to be compared,
identical offset values should be used. For brittle materials such
as dental ceramics, the stress-strain plot is a straight line with no
appreciable plastic region. Thus a determination of yield strength
is not practical at either a 0.1% or 0.2% strain offset because there
is no plastic strain.
Proportional limit, elastic limit, and yield strength (proof stress)
are defined differently for the respective phenomena that occur
during mechanical testing. However, they have been used interchangeably when referring to the yield point. Their values are
usually very close but can be different in some cases. The elastic
limit is the true yield point when this value is available. The proportional limit is used as the yield point when the proportional
limit is well defined on the stress-strain curve and known to be
close to the elastic limit. The yield strength is easy to obtain from
a stress-strain curve with a preset amount of plastic deformation.
Remember that the yield strength is defined with some plastic
deformation in mind, but the proportional and elastic limits
cover elastic deformation only. As shown in Figure 4-5, the yield
strength (proof stress) is greater than the proportional limit. These
values are important in the selection of dental materials because
they represent the stress at which permanent deformation of the
structure begins. If stresses generated during chewing exceed these
values, the restoration or appliance may become distorted and no
longer function as originally designed.
Imagine a patient biting on a bolus of food, as shown in
Figure 4-3, exerting enough load to generate tensile stresses at the
area noted as tension of the bridge alloy. As the patient gradually applies the load, the tensile stress in these areas will increase

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

proportionally to the magnitude of the load applied. If the stress
generated is below the elastic limit and up to the proportional
limit, the removal of the load will always result in an elastic recovery of the bridge from the slight bending that occurs. If the patient
at any time exerts a load that creates stresses in the tension area
that are equal to or exceed the elastic limit of the material used,
the bridge will be permanently deformed, and then break. Accordingly, one must choose materials with adequately high elastic limits
for the construction of a dental bridge. If the size of the connector
is too small, greater tensile stress is generated. A properly designed
restoration is also important.

Elastic Modulus (Young’s Modulus or Modulus
of Elasticity)
Hooke’s law states that stress and strain change proportionally
within the region of elastic deformation. Mathematically, there is
a constant between the stress and the strain. We call this constant
the elastic modulus, modulus of elasticity, or Young’s modulus,
designated by the letter E. The elastic modulus (E) of the orthodontic wire used in Figure 4-5 can be calculated as follows using
the proportional limit (1018 MPa) and the elastic strain (0.0053)
of this material:
1018 MPa
E  Stress   
 192, 075 MPa  192 GPa .
Strain 
0.0053
(3)
Because the elastic modulus represents the ratio of the elastic stress
to the elastic strain, we can reason that the lower the strain recorded
for a given stress, the greater the value of the modulus. For example, if
wire A is much more difficult to bend than wire B of the same shape
and size, considerably higher stress must be induced before a desired
elastic deformation can be produced. As such, wire A is considered
to have a comparatively higher modulus of elasticity than wire B.
Thus wire A, with a higher modulus of elasticity, stretches less than
wire B under the same stress. Elastomeric impression materials have
a greater stiffness (elastic modulus) than alginate-based impression
materials. Thus a greater force is needed to remove an elastomeric
impression tray from undercut areas in the mouth. The modulus of
elasticity of most dental biomaterials is given in units of either MPa
or GPa (gigapascals; 1 GPa = 1000 MPa).
In general usage, the term elasticity also implies “being easily
stretched or expanded,” which contradicts what we just learned:
that a material with a high elastic modulus requires more force to
deform. In fact, elasticity in solid mechanics describes the ability of
a strained body to recover this body’s original size and shape after
deformation. This statement does not imply if straining the material
is easy or difficult based on the stress applied. Therefore the elastic
modulus is a parameter that quantifies the elastic behavior. We can
also state that the elastic modulus describes the relationship between
stress and strain within the elastic region. Some would state that
the elastic modulus is the slope of the initial straight portion of the
stress-strain curve. The steeper the line, the higher the elastic modulus and the stiffer the material. As such, the elastic modulus has been
considered a measurement of the stiffness or rigidity of a material.
Recall Figure 2-2, A, in which bond force is defined as the
attraction between two atoms, and Figure 4-4, B, which shows the
distance between atoms under the influence of shear stress, such as
the distance between atoms 2 and 3 and between atoms 4 and 5.
The zero resultant force at equilibrium represents the material that

300
CS = 262 MPa
250
Compressive stress (MPa)

70

CS = 234 MPa
PL = 235 MPa

200
PL = 176 MPa

Enamel

150

Dentin
100
Edentin = 11.7 GPa
Eenamel = 33.6 GPa

50

0
0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

Strain (%)

• Figure 4-7 Stress-strain plot for enamel and dentin that have been
subjected to compression. The ultimate compressive strength (CS), proportional limit (PL), and elastic modulus (E) values are shown. (Data from
Stanford JW, et al: Compressive properties of hard tooth tissue. J Am Dent
Assoc 60:746–756, 1960.)

is not under stress. The change in distance between atoms increases
with respect to the external force applied and should follow the
curve of resultant force in Figure 2-2. The slope of resultant force
drawn from the equilibrium position will have the same meaning
as the slope of the stress-strain curve. Because the force needed to
change the distance between atoms depends on the bond strength
between atoms, the value of the elastic modulus reflects the atomic
bond strength of the material, which remains constant and independent of mechanical treatment, such as the stress applied, and
the plastic deformation incurred during the test.
Figure 4-7 shows a stress-strain graph for enamel and dentin
that have been subjected to compressive stress. These curves were
constructed from the typical values of elastic moduli, proportional
limit, and ultimate compressive strength reported in the scientific
literature. Variations in the values of the proportional limit, elastic
modulus, and ultimate compressive strength have been reported
for enamel and dentin relative to the area of the tooth from which
the test specimens were obtained. Note that the proportional limit,
ultimate compressive strength, and elastic modulus of enamel are
greater than the corresponding values for dentin (Figure 4-7). The
elastic modulus of enamel is about three times that of dentin in this
study. Dentin can sustain more plastic deformation than enamel
under compressive loading before dentin fractures. Thus enamel
is a stiffer and more brittle material than dentin, and unsupported
enamel is more susceptible to fracture. Conversely, dentin is more
flexible and tougher. Although there is no quantifiable measurement for the brittleness of a material, we often describe materials as
being more brittle or less brittle. We refer to more brittle materials
as having less elastic deformation before fracture and less brittle
materials as having more elastic deformation before fracture.
Recall Figure 3-2, which shows a Newtonian fluid exhibiting
a linear relationship between the shear stress and strain rate of the
fluid, and the slope of the curve is defined as the viscosity of the
liquid. Figure 4-5 shows that there is a linear relationship between
the tensile stress and strain of a solid, and the slope defines the

CHAPTER 4

elastic modulus of a solid. Both terms are derived from the stress
and strain relationship; they represent two different properties.
The elastic modulus is the quantity that dictates how much the
material will deform elastically for a given stress and remain at
that state forever unless the stress is removed, at which time, the
material returns to its initial shape. The viscosity is the analogous
quantity that shows how fast the material will flow and the change
of strain in proportion to the duration that the stress is applied.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can the ultimate tensile stress (ultimate strength) sometimes be less
than the maximum tensile stress?

Ultimate Strength and True Strength
Ultimate strength for tensile, compressive, and shear tests is calculated by dividing the maximum force recorded before fracture
by the original cross-sectional area of the material. The specimen
configuration shown in Figure 4-5 demonstrates that the cross
section of the wire decreases as the wire lengthens under tensile
stress. Because of the reduction in area, the force required to
increase deformation decreases. Thus the stress calculated past the
ultimate tensile strength decreases, leading to a breaking strength
that is lower than the ultimate tensile strength. Figure 4-8 shows a
stress-strain plot of a metal rod that has been subjected to a tensile
test. The stress is calculated using the original cross-sectional area
(orange line) and the actual cross-sectional area (green line). The
stress value, calculated as the force divided by the actual crosssectional area at each measured strain value, is known as true
stress. The green line shows that the ultimate tensile strength and

UTSb (BS)

Tensile stress, σ

UTSa
BS
PL

Toughness

Resilience

Flexibility

Ductility

Strain, ε

• Figure 4-8 Conventional tensile stress-strain curve (orange line) in the
plastic deformation region calculated using the initial cross-sectional area
of a rod. The green line (above the orange line) represents the calculated
stress values based on the actual reduced area of the rod as deformation increases. Note that the ultimate tensile strength (UTS) value of the green line
is the same as the breaking strength (BS). The resilience can be calculated
by measuring the area within the elastic region. Mathematically, the area is
half of the proportional limit (PL) multiplied by the elastic strain (equation [4]).
The toughness is the total area within the elastic and plastic regions.

Mechanical Properties of Solids

71

breaking strength are the same. The original dimension is always
used to calculate the various strength values reported—and for
good reason. The failure of a restoration or device means that
either yielding or rupture has occurred, whichever came first.
Damage has occurred at a lower load, and therefore a higher and
more precise value of true ultimate strength is not meaningful.
Figure 4-8 demonstrates that after a metal rod has been stressed
beyond this material’s yield point, the stress needs to increase to
continue exerting plastic deformation until fracture of the specimen occurs. One may think that the material has a fixed yield point;
once the stress applied has overcome that barrier, the same level of
stress should be enough to induce further plastic deformation until
the specimen fractures. The true stress of Figure 4-8 shows that the
material that has been plastically deformed is resisting further yielding
because more stress is required. Indeed, the material becomes stronger
with respect to resisting further plastic deformation, as it is plastically
deformed until it fractures, and this phenomenon is known as strain
hardening, work hardening, or cold working. We will learn the mechanism of material strengthening by plastic deformation in Chapter 9,
Dislocation Movement in Polycrystalline Alloys.

Flexibility and Ductility
From the stress-strain curve, we know that for each stress value,
there is a corresponding strain value. Having a material with sufficient strength to resist plastic deformation or fracture is not the
only consideration for selection. However, there are instances
where elastic and plastic deformation are critical. For example,
in an orthodontic appliance, a spring is often extended a considerable distance under the influence of a small stress. In such a
case, the structure is said to be flexible and possesses the property
of flexibility. Flexibility is defined as the elastic strain shown on
a stress-strain curve (Figure 4-8) or the reversible flexural strain
of a bending test. Ductility represents the amount of permanent
deformation a material can sustain under a tensile load up to
the point of fracture, which is the deformation from the proportional limit to the breaking strength in Figure 4-8. Malleability
is the amount of permanent deformation a material can sustain
without rupture under compression, such as hammering or rolling a metal rod into a thin sheet. Gold is the most ductile and
malleable pure metal, followed by silver. Of the metals of interest
in dentistry, platinum ranks third in ductility, and copper ranks
third in malleability.
Ductility can be determined in one of three ways: (1) the percent
elongation after fracture as seen in Figure 4-8, (2) the reduction in
area of tensile test specimens, and (3) the maximum number of
bends performed in a cold-bend test before the wire fractures. The
first method involves taking the information directly from a stressstrain curve. The second method involves necking at the fractured
end of a ductile metal wire after rupture under a tensile load. The
percent decrease in cross-sectional area of the fractured end in comparison with the original area of the wire or rod is referred to as the
relative reduction in area. The third method is known as the coldbend test. We can bend several orthodontic wires back and forth
individually until they all break. The wire that takes the greatest
number of bends to break is the most ductile wire.
Burnishing of a cast metal margin to reduce the width of a gap
between the crown margin and the tooth surface is a good example of flexibility and ductility at work. Figure 4-9 shows a burnishing procedure of an open metal margin (Figure 4-9, A), where
a smooth, dull instrument is used as a burnishing tool to press
the metal margin against the tooth (Figure 4-9, B) and close the

72

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

A
B
C
• Figure 4-9 Schematic illustration of a procedure to close an open margin of a metal crown by burnishing with a dull instrument shaped like a rotary instrument. A, The margin of the crown is open. B, The
instrument pulls down the margin and press toward the tooth to “close” the margin. C, Note that after the
instrument is removed, the elastic strain of the crown rebounds; a slight marginal discrepancy remains. To
reduce the size of discrepancy, one needs to pull down the metal farther toward the gingival to compensate for the elastic recovery.

marginal gap. This movement is possible as a result of the elastic
plus plastic strain of the metal. After the instrument is removed,
the margin springs back an amount equal to the total elastic strain
(Figure 4-9, C). Because at least 25 μm of space must be provided
for the cement between the tooth and the crown, total burnishing
on the tooth or die is usually adequate because the amount of elastic strain recovery is relatively small. Pushing the margin further
while pressing against the tooth to compensate for the anticipated
elastic recovery may be required. Naturally, the metal should have
relatively high ductility to prevent fracture of the margin during
burnishing and moderate yield strength to facilitate the procedure.

Resilience and Toughness
Work is the product of the force times the amount of deformation (distance) through which the force acts. When work is performed on a body, energy is imparted to this body. Consequently,
when a dental restoration is deformed, the restoration absorbs
energy. If the induced stress is less than the proportional limit
(i.e., the oral structure is not permanently deformed), only elastic
energy is stored in the structure until the applied force is removed.
Resilience (Ur) is the ability of a material to absorb energy when
it is deformed elastically (Figure 4-8). The modulus of resilience is
the amount of strain energy that can be absorbed per unit volume
without permanent distortion and can be determined by the area
of the elastic region:
2
U r  1   1   .
2
2 E

(4)
When the induced stress goes beyond the elastic limit of the
material, additional work is needed to cause plastic deformation.
The ability of a material to absorb energy and plastically deform
without fracture is called toughness. The modulus of toughness
is the amount of strain energy per unit volume that a material can
absorb just before it fractures and can be calculated as the area
under the stress-strain curve up to the fracture point.
Toughness increases with an increase in strength and ductility. The greater the strength and the higher the ductility (total
plastic strain) are, the greater the toughness is. Thus we can conclude that a tough material is generally strong, although a strong

material is not necessarily tough. The term brittleness is generally
considered to be the opposite of toughness. It is important to note
that in popular terms, resilience is associated with springiness,
which implies bouncing back from a deformation. In the present context, resilience precisely means the amount of strain energy
absorbed within a unit volume of a structure being stressed to its
proportional limit.

Poisson’s Ratio
Because of the conservation of mass, an object, such as a cylinder, becomes longer and thinner when a tensile force is applied
to it. Conversely, a compressive force acts to make such an object
shorter and wider. An axial tensile stress, σz, along the z-axis (long
axis) of a mutually perpendicular x,y,z-coordinate system produces
an elastic tensile strain (εz) and an accompanying elastic contraction in the x- and y-directions (εx and εy, respectively). The ratio
of εx/εz or εy/εz is an engineering property of the material called
Poisson’s ratio ( ν), calculated as follows:
y

 x  .
z
z
(5)
Poisson’s ratio can be similarly determined in an experiment
involving an axial compressive stress. For an ideal isotropic material of constant volume, the ratio is 0.5. Most engineering materials have values between 0.25 and 0.30.

Other Strength Test Methods
There exists a large number of standardized tests to determine the
various mechanical properties of materials. Three types of tests relevant to dental materials are discussed.

Diametral Tensile Strength
Tensile strength can be determined by subjecting a rod, wire, or
dumbbell-shaped specimen to tensile loading. A lack of plastic
deformation for adaptation to the gripping device of a conventional tensile test apparatus and alignment makes tensile tests for
brittle materials difficult. However, when a short cylinder (disk)

CHAPTER 4

is laid on the side with a load applied from the top along the
diameter of the cylinder, the load generates tensile stress perpendicular to the vertical plane passing through the center of the disk
(Figure 4-10), forcing the cylinder to expand laterally. This test
is referred to as the diametral compression test, and the strength
value obtained is the diametral tensile strength. In this method,
the compressive load is applied by a flat plate against the side of a
short cylindrical specimen (disk). Fracture should occur along this
vertical plane (the dashed vertical line on the disk). The diametral
tensile strength value is calculated by the following formula:
Diametral tensile strength = 2F ,
πDt
(6)
where F is the applied load, D is the diameter of the disk, and t is
the thickness of the disk.
This test is simple to conduct and provides excellent reproducibility. However, the use of this test on materials that exhibit
appreciable plastic deformation before fracture results in erroneously high tensile-strength values. In addition, fracture of the
specimen into several pieces rather than the ideal fragmentation
into two segments suggests an unreliable test result.

F

Mechanical Properties of Solids

73

Flexural Strength
Flexural strength measures the response of a material to bending
and does not measure the fundamental material properties, which
are tensile, compression, and shear strengths. During bending,
all three fundamental stresses are present. The flexural test is a
strength test of a bar supported at each end (Figure 4-11) or a
thin disk supported along a lower support circle under a static
load (Figure 4-12). The tensile stress usually develops along the
lower surface, which is the supported side of the test specimen,
and causes fracture. For the bar specimen, the failure stress value
is referred to as the uniaxial flexural strength, flexural strength,
transverse strength, or modulus of rupture. For the disk specimen,
the failure stress value is referred to as the biaxial flexural strength.

Uniaxial Flexural Strength
When the load is applied, the flat bar specimen bends with tensile, compressive, and shear stresses generated simultaneously. The
resulting strain is represented by a decrease in the length of the top
surface (compressive strain) of the specimen and an increase in the
length of the lower surface (tensile strain). Consequently, the principal stresses on the upper surface are compressive, whereas those on
the lower surface are tensile. Obviously, the stresses change direction within the specimen between the top and bottom surfaces,
with both stress and strain being zero at the transition. This neutral
surface does not change in dimension and is known as the neutral
axis. Shear stress is also produced near the supported ends of the
specimen but does not play a significant role in the fracture process.
There are two different mode-of-flexure tests: three-point
(Figure 4-11, A) and four-point (Figure 4-11, B). For rectangular
cross-section bars, the following equations may be used to calculate the flexural strength:
Three-point flexural σ =

Fracture
plane

3FL ,
2 wt 2

(7)
t

Four-point flexural σ =

Tension

3FL ,
4 wt 2

(8)

F

• Figure 4-10 Diametral compression test. Although a compressive force
is applied along the side of the disk, a tensile fracture is produced. The
tensile strength is calculated from the fracture load, F, the disk diameter, D,
and the disk thickness, t.

where σ = flexural strength (MPa) at the midpoint of the span,
P = the load (N) at fracture,
L = the distance between two support rollers (mm),
w = the width of specimen (mm), and
t = the thickness or height of specimen (mm).
One of the limitations of the three-point flexural test is that if
the bar specimen does not fracture at the midpoint directly under
the applied force (F), the moment of force at the point of fracture
should be used to calculate the fracture stress at the actual point
of fracture. The four-point flexural test shown in Figure 4-11, B

P
P/2

P/2

L/2

A

L

L/4

L/4

B

L

• Figure 4-11 Uniaxial flexure test designs. A, Three-point test. B, Four-point test.

74

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

P

• Figure 4-12 Schematic illustration of the piston-on-three-ball test for

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
How can two identical forces produce two different stresses in an all-ceramic
crown? Is it possible for a stiff material with a high modulus of elasticity to
fail with no plastic deformation and at a lower strength than a more flexible
material? Explain your answers.

the biaxial flexure test.

is preferred over the three-point test because the analyses of force
balance indicate that there is no shear stress present, and the
moment of force is constant within the central loading span where
fracture is expected.
Flexural tests are preferred to the diametral compressive test
when brittle materials are used in the construction of dental
prostheses, such as cantilevered bridges, multiple-unit FDPs (or
bridges), and complete dentures because the stress distributions
in flexural tests more closely simulate those that occur in these
prostheses.

Biaxial Flexural Strength
The edge of rectangular specimens often chips or fractures during preparation and can become an area of stress concentration influencing the strength values. The biaxial flexure test is
based on the piston-on-three-ball design that directs the strain
toward the center of the disk, away from the edge of the specimen (Figure 4-12). This test is preferred by some scientists to
avoid the problem of edge effects. For the typical biaxial flexural
tests, disk-shaped specimens 12 mm in diameter and 1.2 mm in
thickness are used. The load is applied by means of a piston with a
slightly curved contact surface, and the disk is supported by steel
balls, which have a diameter of approximately 3.2 mm. These are
arranged at an angle of 120° relative to each other on a circle
of approximately 10 to 12 mm in diameter. The biaxial flexural
strength is calculated from a complex equation that is beyond the
scope of this book.

Impact Strength
The term impact describes the reaction of a stationary object to a
collision with a moving object. A Charpy-type impact tester is
usually used to measure impact strength. A pendulum is released
that swings down to fracture a bar specimen with a V-notch in
the center and supported at both ends. The energy lost by the
pendulum during the fracture of the specimen can be determined by a comparison between the length the pendulum swings
after impact with the pendulum’s free swing when no impact
occurs. The energy lost divided by the area of the fracture surface
is the impact strength, with a unit of kJ/m2. Unlike the case in
most mechanical tests, the dimensions, shape, and design of the
specimen to be tested should be identical for uniform results.
This property may be defined as the energy required to fracture
a material under an impact force. An Izod-type impact tester is
like that of a Charpy, except the V-notch specimen is clamped
vertically at one end, and the blow is delivered at a certain
distance above the clamped end instead of at the center of the
specimen.
During impact, the external forces and resulting stresses
change rapidly; therefore a stress-strain curve cannot be used to
predict the impact strength precisely, but it is a good indicator. For
example, a material with a low elastic modulus and a high tensile
strength is more resistant to impact forces, whereas a high elastic
modulus and a low tensile strength suggest low-impact resistance.

Fracture of Restorations
In one of his books, Leonardo da Vinci described an experiment
where tensile strengths were measured for various lengths of iron
wires. His finding was that longer wires were weaker than shorter
wires. This result is inconsistent with the classical theory of what is
now known. Unexpected fractures of dental prostheses and restorations occur occasionally even when high-quality materials have
been used. From the point of view of fracture mechanics, both
observations are related to the presence of small microstructural
flaws and defects on the surface or within the internal structure
that facilitate the generation of locally high stresses in areas near
holes, grooves, notches, sharp corners, cracks, and other changes
in the dimension of the structure even though the average stress
within the structure is low. This increase in the peak-stress section
is called the stress concentration or stress riser. During da Vinci’s
time, the technology of making iron wire was likely to produce
inherent surface flaws that increased in number with longer wires.
This in turn increased the probability of fracture of longer wires
with a lower load.

Stress Concentration
Figure 4-13 shows an illustration of the theoretical tensile-stress distribution in brittle and ductile materials in the presence of a crack.
The localized stress (σLO) at the tip of the crack is proportional to
the square root of the ratio of the crack length (L) to the radius of
the crack tip (ρ); the relationship is shown as σLO ∝ L / ρ . The
crack tip in a brittle material is sharp (small radius) and does not
deform plastically to relieve stress. Therefore the crack is prone
to propagate as the localized stress increases to a critical level.
Note the increased level of tensile stress at the tip of the flaw
(Figure 4-13, A). However, the stresses at areas far away from these
flaws are much lower. Although the tensile stress has increased at
the flaw tip in brittle and ductile materials, stress has increased
by a smaller amount in the ductile material (Figure 4-13, B), in
which plastic deformation has occurred with subsequent widening of the flaw tip (increasing radius of the tip), thereby reducing
the magnitude of localized tensile stress. The flaw does not play
a significant role when the material is subjected to an external
compressive force (Figure 4-13, C) because the compressive stress
that develops in the material tends to distribute uniformly and
close the crack.
Surface defects, such as porosity, grinding roughness, and
machining damage, are common with brittle materials (e.g.,
ceramics, amalgams, and composites). These defects can be eliminated or reduced in depth by polishing. There are also interior
flaws, such as voids or inclusions. Unfortunately, little can be
done for interior flaws other than to ensure the highest quality of the structure during the fabrication stage. The design of
any prosthesis involves marked changes in contour, such as the
point of attachment of a clasp arm to a partial denture framework or a sharp internal angle at the pulpal-axial line angle of a
tooth preparation for an amalgam or composite restoration. The
transition areas often become sites of stress concentration. Any

CHAPTER 4

Brittle
material

Ductile
material

Crack
tip

l
Tensile
stress

Mechanical Properties of Solids

75

Brittle or ductile
material

Crack
tip

Flaw

Flaw

Flaw
Tensile
stress

Compressive
stress

A
C Compressive force
B Tensile force
Tensile force
• Figure 4-13 Effect of surface flaw on the stress distribution of materials under tension and compression. A, Surface flaw on brittle material substantially increases the tensile stress at the tip of the
flaw as a result of stress concentration. B, Plastic deformation at the tip of the surface flaw on the
surface of ductile material reduces the intensity of stress concentration at the tip of the flaw. C, Surface flaws have no influence on the compressive strength as the tip of the flaw is pressed closed by
compression.

change in contour should vary gradually rather than abruptly.
Therefore notches should be avoided. The internal line angles of
tooth preparations should be rounded to minimize the risk of
cusp fracture.
Recall the discussion on the challenges of restorations in the
oral cavity in Chapter 1, thermal expansion in Chapter 3, and
elastic modulus earlier in this chapter. When a direct restoration is bonded to the tooth or a prosthesis is cemented to tooth
structure, there is a difference in the elastic moduli and thermal
expansion coefficients across the bonded interphase. As the interphase is being occluded or subjected to temperature change from
food intake, the dimensions of all materials, including the tooth,
change accordingly but are different in quantity. The differences
in the quantity of changes can result in additional stresses in
the interphase and initiate fracture of the weaker structure. It is
not likely that all restorative materials used have elastic moduli
and thermal expansion coefficients that closely match that of
the tooth. Therefore the weaker, more brittle material should
have the lower elastic modulus so that more stress is transferred
to the material with the higher elastic modulus. The weaker,
more brittle material should have a slightly lower expansion or
contraction coefficient so that a protective compressive stress is
sustained in the structure of this material next to the interface
(Chapter 10, Maximize Development of Residual Compressive
Stresses).
Unusually high stresses may occur when a load is applied over
a small area of contact, also known as point contact or Hertzian
load. This phenomenon typically arises on a microscopic scale
when a force is transmitted through two bodies in contact. A clinical example is that of a cusp tip of an opposing crown or tooth
that encounters another restoration. The cusp tip should be well
rounded so that the occlusal contact areas on the brittle material are
large and wide, leading to reduced stress. In addition, the internal
line angle of the tooth preparation should have as large of a radius
of curvature as possible to reduce Hertzian stress in the intaglio of
the restoration.
In the following segment, we discuss some parameters that
have been devised to characterize the role of flaws in the propagation of cracks within the materials.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Fracture toughness is a more precise measure of the fracture resistance of a brittle
material than the tensile strength. Why is the tensile strength of brittle materials
—such as dental amalgam, composite, ceramic, and inorganic cements—so
variable? Which one of a series of reported tensile strength values should be used
in considering the selection of a new product made of one of these materials?

Fracture Toughness
For brittle materials, such as dental ceramics, strength is of limited
value in the design of ceramic prostheses. Small defects (porosity
and microcracks) are randomly distributed in location and size
throughout a ceramic, causing large strength variations in otherwise-identical ceramic specimens. Alan Griffith in 1920 proposed
that the failure of brittle materials occurs at the largest flaw of the
material. He invoked the thermodynamics energy conservation
law to formulate a fracture theory. Recall from the discussion of
resilience (Figure 4-8) that when an object is stressed elastically,
there is strain energy stored within the object (Figure 4-14, A).
The presence of flaws in a stressed body reduces the volume of
the solid under stress and thus the strain energy that would have
been stored in the shaded area around the notch in Figure 4-14, B.
Meanwhile, the total surface energy of the object increases, reflecting the increase in the surface area of the object resulting from the
presence of the notch.
The Griffith theory postulates that when the strain-energy
reduction from the presence of the notch is less than the total
surface energy of the notch surface, nothing happens at the tip of
the notch. However, this balance of energy changes as the external
stress increases. The quantity of the strain-energy reduction that
would have been stored in the shaded area increases, whereas the
surface energy of the notch surface remains the same because there
is no change to the size of the notch. When the projected strainenergy reduction in the shaded area exceeds the surface energy of
the notch surface, a crack will propagate from the tip of the notch
and continue until the object fractures. Griffith further developed
a relationship between the stress at failure and the flaw size (the
notch) based on balancing the reduction of strain energy that

76

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

σ

σ

Mode I:
Tension opening

Mode II:
In-plane shear
c

Mode III:
Out-off-plane shear
or tearing

A

σ

B

σ

C

• Figure 4-14 Energy-balance approach of Griffith criterion of fracture and modes of fracture.
A, An illustration of uniform stress distribution within an object under tensile force. The overall energy
of the stressed object is the total of the surface energy of the object and the strain energy stored in
2
the object (= 21  E  V0 , where Vo is the volume of the object). B, The effect of a notch with the depth
of “c” on the stress distribution of the same specimen under the same tensile force. The shaded
area represents the volume (V) of the object that does not store strain energy. The overall energy of
the stressed object decreases by the amount of strain energy that would have been stored in the
2
shaded volume (= 21  E  V ). However, the object gains surface energy from the surface of the notch
( = 2γc c t). γc is the surface energy, c is the depth of the notch, and t is the thickness of the object.
C, Three modes of stressing condition to enable propagation of preexisting cracks. Arrows show the
direction of forces.

occurs during fracture with the increase in surface energy resulting from the creation of new free surfaces when a crack grows. The
analysis gave the following result:
f 

2c E
,
c
(9)

where σf is the failure stress, c is the flaw size, γc is the surface
energy, and E is the elastic modulus. Because γc and E are intrinsic material properties, the value of 2γ c E should be a constant
for the material of the same composition being tested, and the
equation can be rearranged as 2 c E  f c . The relationship
embodies that scatter in the measurement of fracture stress (σ f)
arises from the variation in the size of flaw (c). The term f c is
known as stress intensity factor (Kc) or fracture toughness, and
K c  f c is the expression that describes the severity of the
stress state at the crack tip.
The scenario just discussed leads to the conclusion that during
fracture, new surfaces are created to release the elastic strain energy
stored during stressing. Under static-loading conditions, the work
required to extend the crack by the unit length is equal to the
dissipated elastic-strain energy. Therefore for brittle materials, the
term 2γc is also called the critical strain-energy release rate (Gc, for
Griffith), and Gc  2  c  K c2 / E; the factor 2 is needed because a
pair of equal-size free surfaces has evolved for every crack.
There are three ways of applying a force to enable a crack to
propagate experimentally, as shown in Figure 4-14, C: mode I is
commonly called the opening-mode loading, mode II corresponds
to shearing of the crack face that occurs with in-plane shear
stresses, and mode III is a tearing action driven by out-of-plane
shear stresses. The fracture toughness of a material determined
under tension using a standard configuration with a known flaw

size is given by the symbol KIc (the subscript I refers to mode I
fracture) in units of MPa.m1/2. The Griffith relationship is often
expressed as follows for a mode I fracture:
K Ic  f Y c crit ,
(10)
where ccrit is the critical flaw size that initiates propagation when
the stress reaches σf. Note that Y is a geometrical factor that comprises π shown in equation (9). The use of Kc in the literature
means that the experimental specimens used are not of standard
configuration with a known flaw size.
Fracture toughness (critical-stress intensity) is a mechanical
property that describes the resistance of brittle materials to the
catastrophic propagation of flaws under an applied stress. Thus the
fracture resistance of a porcelain veneer with a KIc value of
0.75 MPa.m1/2 is much lower than that of the tougher supporting
core ceramics used for ceramic-ceramic prostheses, such as alumina, with a KIc value of 3.4 MPa.m1/2, and yttrium-stabilized
zirconia, with a KIc value of 7.9 MPa.m1/2. Keep in mind that the
toughness of the material discussed earlier is about the energy
needed to fracture the material and comprises both elastic deformation and plastic deformation if fracture occurs.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Is a stiff material (high elastic modulus) stronger than a more flexible
material? Explain your answer by sketching a stress-strain plot.

Fatigue Strength
Strength values obtained from measurement of the failure loads
described in earlier tests are based on one loading cycle to failure.
Clinically, these strength tests can be misleading because these

CHAPTER 4

Stress
(σ), MPaS
Stress
amplitude,

restorations are subjected to repeated or cyclic loading and need
to be designed to withstand these recurring forces. Normal mastication induces several thousands of stress cycles per day within a
dental restoration without showing visible signs that would lead to
fracture. After a period of service, failure can occur without warning during normal mastication. Most prosthesis and restoration
fractures develop progressively over many stress cycles after the
initiation of a crack from a critical flaw that subsequently propagates until a sudden, unexpected fracture occurs. Stresses well
below the ultimate tensile strength of the material can produce
premature fracture of a dental prosthesis because microscopic
flaws grow slowly over many cycles of stress. This phenomenon
is called fatigue failure. The stress required to produce failures in
a specified number of cycles is called fatigue strength or endurance
strength. For glasses and certain glass-containing ceramics, the
induced tensile stress and the presence of an aqueous environment
further reduce the number of cycles to cause fatigue failure.
Fatigue behavior can be represented by an S−N diagram
(Figure 4-15), which is determined by subjecting a series of specimens to a constant cyclic-stress amplitude (S), which is the amount
that the stress deviates from the mean cyclic stress, and the number
of loading cycles (N) until the specimen fails. Millions of cycles
might be required to cause failure at lower loading levels, so the
abscissa is plotted logarithmically. In some materials, the S−N
curve flattens out eventually so that below a certain endurance
limit (σe), failure does not occur no matter how long the loads are
cycled (curve A of Figure 4-15). Thus, when the applied stress from
mastication is below the endurance limit of the material, the restoration is said to be free from fatigue failure. For other materials that
do not exhibit well-defined endurance limits, such as curve B of
Figure 4-15, we can specify a desirable life cycle NF, which is set at
5 × 107 cycles in Figure 4-15, and identify the corresponding stress
amplitude. The value of this stress amplitude is the fatigue strength.
For brittle materials with rough surfaces, the endurance limit is
lower than would be expected if the surfaces were highly polished.

Endurance limit

A

σe

NF
104

105

106

107

108

77

Some ceramic materials exhibit a phenomenon referred to
as static fatigue or delayed failure. These materials will support
high static loads for a long period of time, and then fail abruptly
under the same load. This failure is believed to result from a
stress-dependent chemical reaction between water vapor and the
ceramic surface, which alters the shape and/or depth of surface
flaws. The flaw size lengthens over time, the magnitude of tensile
stress that can be sustained by the ceramic is reduced, and eventually, the ceramic fails under the same load.

Weibull Modulus
The strength of an object or a material most often refers to the
maximum stress required to cause fracture or plastic deformation.
After repeating the experiment, we find that the breaking-strength
values of all specimens are not the same. We group the measured
values and calculate the mean and standard deviation to show the
variation of the strength values. That information shows that about
50% of the tested specimens have failed below this strength. If we
wanted to know the stress level below which 95% of specimens
of identical shape, size, and processing conditions would survive a
given fracture test, we would find that the mean and standard deviation cannot provide an exact value of the breaking strength wanted.
The reason is that calculation of the standard deviation is based on
the normal distribution of the strength values. We learn that crack
propagation initiated at the inherent surface flaws are the causes
of failure at the stress levels recorded. If the flaws are distributed
uniformly throughout the entire pool of specimens, then the breaking strength must be about the same for all specimens. The fact that
there is always a range of values indicates that flaws are clustered
inconsistently among test specimens. In addition, strength values
from mechanical tests are typically asymmetrical.
Let us assume that in a group of specimens, there is a definite
probability of fracture (Pf) occurring on each specimen when this
is subjected to a specified level of stress (σ), and the value of Pf
monotonously increases with the stress. For a group of specimens
tested, if each specimen had been subjected to a stress lower than
the lowest strength value of the group, the probability of any
specimen to fracture is Pf = 0, and if a stress greater than the
highest value of the group had been used, then Pf = 1. Therefore
each strength value of the group is associated with the Pf of the
specimen. The strength of a material can possibly be presented as
a distribution of values rather than as one specific mean value with
standard deviation. How do we formulate such a distribution?
Waloddi Weibull in 1937 devised a distribution function, now
known as the Weibull distribution, that fits the values of σ and
Pf discussed earlier and calculates the parameters. The following
equation is the two-parameter (σ0 and m) version of the Weibull
distribution:
  m 
Pf = 1 − exp  −  σ   ,
  σ0  

B
Fatigue strength at NF cycles

103

Mechanical Properties of Solids

(11)
109

Strain
(ε), % N
Cycles
to failure,
• Figure 4-15 Typical S–N curve of fatigue test. Curve A shows the material exhibiting an endurance limit. Curve B exhibits no well-defined endurance limit; however, the effective endurance limit (fatigue strength) can be
acquired by specifying the desired loading cycles (NF) before failure.

where Pf = fracture probability defined by the relation Pf = i/
(N + 1),
i = rank of the strength value σi,
N = total number of specimens in the sample,
m = shape parameter or Weibull modulus,
σ = fracture strength as measured, and
σ0 = scale parameter or characteristic strength.

78

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

1.0

Weibull Analyses

Cumulative probability of failure

0.9
0.8

A
B
C
D

0.7
0.6

D

0.5

Material

Characteristic
Parameter

Weibull
Modulus

Strength of 1%
Failure Rate

A
B
C
D

158.1
158.2
242.5
258.8

7.6
19.0
9.7
13.8

86.3
124.2
150.9
185.4

0.4

Descriptive Statistics

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
75

100

125

150

175

200

225

250

275

300

325

Material

Mean
Strength

Standard
Deviation

A
B
C
D

149.0
153.6
231.0
249.0

23.8
10.4
29.3
22.4

Biaxial flexural strength (MPa)

• Figure 4-16 Illustration of Weibull distribution. A, Weibull plot of four materials showing biaxial flexurestrength values with respect to the calculated probability of failure and the best-fit curve by equation (8).
B, Result of Weibull analyses and descriptive statistics of the same data set. (Experimental data courtesy
Dr. Hae-Hyoung Lee, reported in Choi B-J, Yoon S, IM Y-W, et al: Uniaxial/biaxial flexure strengths and
elastic properties of resin-composite block materials for CAD/CAM, Dent Mater 35:389–401, 2019.)

To use this equation, we first sort the strength data of a test
group with N specimens in the order of lowest to the highest and
assign each strength value a Pf value by dividing the rank (i) of the
strength value by (N + 1). The strength values with corresponding
Pf values were fitted in the distribution function to determine the
values of parameters σ0 and m. With the knowledge of these two
values, the stress of the projected failure rate can be calculated.
Figure 4-16 presents experimental data by Weibull distribution
and normal distribution.
These calculations are based on data obtained on a representative population (ideally 30 or more) of specimens tested in a
manner similar to that which the materials will experience during
clinical service. A low Weibull modulus value reflects a high variation in measured strength values with a high standard deviation
(materials A and C in Figure 4-16), and the size range of the material’s physical flaws, whether inherent to the material or resulting from the manufacturing process, are clustered inconsistently.
There is an increase in the probability that flaws will interact with
each other to weaken a brittle material. The use of these products
for prostheses will result in a greater variation in fracture force
and decreased reliability. Higher values of the Weibull modulus
correspond to a higher level of homogeneity of the material, such
as lower values of standard deviation, and greater reliability as a
structural material.
Weibull plots of cumulative probability of failure as a function
of fracture stress (Figure 4-16) can be used as a factor in the design
of dental restorations made from brittle biomedical materials. If a
dental practice specifies that less than 1 restoration in 100 could
fracture during use, the Weibull distribution data can be used to
estimate the stress that would cause this 1% level of failure. With
a knowledge of this 99% survival stress, the design of restorations
can be optimized by changing dimensions or restricting use conditions such that no region within the restoration sustains stresses
above the failure stress. The power of Weibull distribution will be
discussed further in Chapter 18, The Weibull Size Effect.

Properties of Surface Interactions
The loading situation shown in Figure 4-3 focuses on the stress
distributed through the restoration in response to external forces.
One may ask what is happening at the point of contact where
the force is applied. In fact, the material at the point of contact
responds differently from the rest of the material. If the applied
force is delivered by the cusp tip of the opposing tooth followed by
a horizontal movement, sliding occurs at the point of contact. The
localized response to an applied load is characterized by hardness;
however, the sliding results in friction at the interface and the restoration. Friction can cause wear of both objects involved. These
properties are discussed in the following sections.

Hardness
In mineralogy, the relative hardness of a substance is based on the
ability to resist surface scratching. In metallurgy and most other disciplines, the generally accepted concept of hardness is the “resistance
to penetration” by a well-defined configuration of indenter made
of a specific material. On the stress-strain curve, the material first
resists elastic deformation, yields after the elastic limit, and then
undergoes plastic deformation. When the indenter is removed, all
elastic deformation recovers, but a permanent marking is left. An
indentation produced on the surface of a material is the result of the
interaction of numerous properties, such as elastic modulus, compressive strength, proportional limit, and ductility. The tests most
frequently used in determining the hardness of dental materials are
known by the names Brinell, Rockwell, Vickers, Knoop, and Shore.
In the Brinell hardness test, a hardened steel ball is pressed
under a specified load into the polished surface of a material, as
diagrammed in Figure 4-17. The load is divided by the area of the
projected surface of the indentation, and the quotient is referred
to as the Brinell hardness number, usually abbreviated as BHN, or
HBW, when tungsten carbide ball is used. Thus for a given load,

CHAPTER 4

79

136
°
172°3

0'

6°
13

Mechanical Properties of Solids

0°
13

M

M

Ma
M

Brinell

Rockwell
(Brale)

Mb
Vickers

Knoop

• Figure 4-17 Shapes of hardness indenter (upper row) and the indentation depressions left in material
surfaces (lower row). The measured dimension M that is shown for each test is used to calculate hardness.
The following tests are shown: In the Brinell test, a steel ball is used, and the diameter of the indentation
is measured after removal of the indenter. In the Rockwell test, a conical indenter is impressed into the
surface under a minor load (dashed line) and a major load (solid line), and M is the difference between
the two penetration depths. In the Vickers or 136° diamond pyramid test, a pyramidal point is used, and
the diagonal length of the indentation is measured. In the Knoop test, a rhombohedral pyramid diamond tip
is used, and the long axis of the indentation is measured.

the smaller the indentation, the larger the number and the harder
the material.
The Rockwell hardness test is like the Brinell test in that a steel
ball or a conical diamond point is used (Figure 4-17). Instead of
measuring the area of indentation, the depth of penetration is measured directly by a dial gauge on the instrument. Different sizes of
indenters are available for testing a variety of materials. The Rockwell hardness number (abbreviated as RHN) is designated according to the indenter and load employed. The convenience of the
Rockwell test, with direct reading of the depth of the indentation,
has led to the wide usage of this test in industry. However, neither
the Brinell test nor the Rockwell test is suitable for brittle materials.
The Vickers hardness test uses a square-based pyramid
(Figure 4-17). Calculation of the Vickers hardness number (usually abbreviated as HV or VHN) is the same as that for the BHN
in that the load is divided by the projected area of indentation.
The lengths of the diagonals of the indentation are measured and
averaged. The test is suitable for determining the hardness of brittle materials; therefore this test has also been used for measuring
the hardness of other cast dental alloys and tooth structure.
The Knoop hardness test employs a diamond-tipped tool that is
cut in a geometrical configuration (Figure 4-17). The indentation is
rhombic in outline, and the length of the largest diagonal is measured. The load is divided by the projected area to give the Knoop
hardness number (usually abbreviated as HK or KHN). When the
indentation is made and the indenter is subsequently removed, the
shape of the Knoop indenter causes elastic recovery of the projected
indentation to occur primarily along the shorter diagonal. The
stresses are distributed in such a manner that only the dimensions
of the minor axis are subject to change by relaxation. Thus the hardness is virtually independent of the ductility of the tested material.
The Knoop and Vickers tests are classified as microhardness tests
in comparison with the Brinell and Rockwell macrohardness tests.
They give average hardness values over much larger areas. Both the
Knoop and Vickers tests employ loads of less than 9.8 N. The resulting indentations are small and limited to depths of less than 19 μm.
The Shore hardness test is for elastomers that do not yield
to permanent indentation for measurement. Instead, this test

measures the depth of an indentation in the material created by
a given force using a scale of 0 (soft) to 100 (hard). The principle
of the test is also based on resistance to indentation. The hardness
number is based on the depth of penetration of the indenter point
into the material. This hardness test is used mainly for the hardness of extraoral maxillofacial materials.

Friction and Wear (Tribology)
When we write on a blackboard with a piece of chalk, we feel
there is a resistance between the chalk and the blackboard. Meanwhile, we do not feel any stickiness between the chalk and the
blackboard as we lift the chalk between writing. This action leaves
a trail of chalk dust that adheres to the blackboard. If some cooking oil is spread on the board surface, we will feel less resistance
during writing and observe no trail of the dust on the board.
The resistance felt during writing is called friction. The friction
effects are those that arise from the tangential forces transmitted across the interface of contact when solid surfaces are pressed
together by our hands. No stickiness indicates there is no appreciable amount of adhesion between the chalk and the board. The
chalk dust is the result of the process of wear, and the trail is the
result of adhesion. The wear phenomena consist of the removal
of material from the surfaces of one of the contacting bodies as
a result of interaction with the other contacting body. Adhesion is the ability of contacting bodies to withstand tensile force
after being pressed together. The layer of oil on the board surface
keeps the chalk from contacting the blackboard, which effectively
eliminates wear of the chalk. In engineering terms, this process
is called lubrication. In dental material manipulation, this behavior has been used to keep materials from sticking together. For
example, a separating medium is used to keep denture resin from
adhering to the gypsum mold in denture processing (Chapter 11,
Preparation of the Mold).
Tribology is the term referring to the study and application
of the principles of friction, wear, and lubrication. The following
segment focuses on friction and wear as they occur during clinical
service.

80

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Friction
Friction is the force that opposes the relative motion that exists
when a solid object is moved tangentially with respect to the surface of another that this object touches or when an attempt is
made to produce such motion. Although friction is an obstacle to
motion, the presence of friction makes the completion of certain
tasks possible. We fight against friction as we walk or drive to a
destination; however, we need the friction to stop the motion when
we reach the destination. In the dental office, operators holding
various instruments in their hands, such as a tool for condensing
amalgam or scaling teeth, cannot carry out their work if the friction
between the operator’s hand and the instrument is too low. When
this occurs, we call that condition “slippery.” Take the RPD as an
example, the friction between the retentive clasp and the abutment
tooth plays an important role in keeping the RPD stable.
Mechanism of Friction

Macroscopically, a surface may look shiny as light is reflected well
from the surface. The same surface in submicron scale could look like
a mountain terrain filled with peaks called asperities (Figure 4-18).
Consider two solid materials stacked upon each other; there are
points of contact called asperity junctions (Figure 4-18, A), and the
sum of the areas of all the junctions constitute the real area of contact, Ar. The interfacial area between the two surfaces is known as
the apparent surface area (Aa) as observed by our eyes.
Because the real area of contact is only a small fraction of
the apparent surface area, the stress at each junction could be
one or several magnitudes higher than that calculated using
the apparent surface area. One or both materials may be plastically deformed. The harder asperity will dent the softer one, as
shown in Figure 4-18, B, when additional load is applied. Recall
the discussion in Chapter 2, Types of Bonding, that attractions
between atoms and molecules occur at a very short range, on the
order of magnitude of only a few Angstroms. If both surfaces are
free of contaminants, the stress at the asperity/asperity interface
can be high enough to cause bonding at the atomic or molecular level, forming asperity junctions. To begin sliding between

A

opposing surfaces, these junctions need to be broken. As the
sliding continues, asperities of opposing surfaces collide, which
can result in fracture of the weaker asperities or harder asperities
plowing through the softer surface. The combined effort to make
the object move is reflected in the frictional force.
The friction is expressed in quantitative terms as a force. The
initial force needed to start sliding is called static friction, and the
force needed to continue sliding is called kinetic friction. The force
required to begin sliding is greater than the force needed to keep
the object sliding.
Laws of Sliding Friction

The following are the laws of friction expressing the magnitude
of the friction force as a function of macroscopically observable
variables: the applied load, the size of the region of contact, and
the sliding velocity:
1. The friction force F is proportional to the normal force P:
F = μP. This relationship enables us to calculate the coefficients of static friction, μs, and kinetic friction, μk.
2. The friction force is independent of the apparent area of
contact, Aa. Thus large and small objects have the same
coefficients of friction. Keep in mind that the interaction that
occurs at the real areas of contact is what contributes to friction. Additional load increases the real area of contact but not
the apparent area of contact (Figure 4-18, B).
3. The kinetic friction force is independent of the sliding velocity. This implies that the force needed to maintain sliding is
the same at any specified velocity.
Friction plays important roles in various dental appliances and
instruments. For example, we can consider static friction as a mechanism for preventing a restoration from falling off its intended location.

Wear
Wear may be defined as the removal of material from solid surfaces as a result of mechanical action. The wear process is generally
thought of as destructive because it often leads to failure of prostheses or appliances. In fact, there are a considerable number of
practical uses for the wear process. Here are some examples where
controlled wear is needed to accomplish the work: In the making
of a composite restoration, there is a need to shape the restoration
and finish to a pleasing appearance. Finishing involves a sequence
of abrasive processes. Among these are the use of burs, abrasive
paper, and finally, loose abrasive grains to achieve a very smooth
surface. In cutting operations as part of cavity preparation, having
a sharp edge for the cutting tool is essential. If during the operation, the edge becomes blunted, cutting no longer occurs; the process must be stopped, and the edge must be re-formed.
Types of Wear

B
• Figure 4-18 Microscopical aspect of the interface between two objects. A, The weight of the top object is supported by the bottom object
at the points of contact. B, Additional pressure causing more deformation
of the bottom object and additional areas of contact. This illustration indicates that the top object is harder than the bottom one. If one is to slide
the top object horizontally to the right, it needs to overcome the obstacles
of the bottom object at the areas of contact. The force needed to break
through is the friction, and fracture of asperities of either object at the
contact could occur. The residue of fracture asperities is the wear debris.

Research has established that there are four main forms of wear:
(1) adhesive, (2) abrasive, (3) corrosive, and (4) surface-fatigue
wear. Each wear process obeys its own laws; however, on many
occasions, one of the modes of wear acts in such a way as to affect
the others.
Adhesive wear results from the strong bonding that occurs
whenever atoms or molecules come into intimate contact under
pressure. The asperity junctions are broken near the interface
within one of the materials during sliding. In consequence, a
transferred fragment will be formed. That fragment might be broken off when this fragment collides with another asperity from
the opposing material. The repeated process of asperity-junction

CHAPTER 4

formation, fracture near the junction, and detachment of transferred fragments yields debris of adhesive wear.
Abrasive wear arises when a hard, rough surface slides against a
softer surface, digs into this surface, and plows a series of grooves.
The material originally in the grooves is normally removed in
the form of loose fragments, or else the material forms a pair of
mounds along each groove. A harder surface is less likely to wear
than a softer surface because the harder surface resists denting,
but the softer surface does not. This is known as two-body abrasive
wear. Abrasive wear can also arise in a somewhat different situation, when hard, abrasive particles are introduced between sliding
surfaces and abrade material from each surface. The mechanism
of this form of abrasive wear seems to be that an abrasive grain
adheres temporarily to one of the sliding surfaces or is embedded
in the material and plows out a groove in the other. This is known
as three-body abrasive wear.
Corrosive wear occurs in situations where the environment
surrounding a sliding surface interacts chemically with the surface. If the products of reaction are worn off the surface, corrosive
wear has occurred. The first stage of corrosive wear is corrosive
attack of the surface, which is identical with ordinary corrosion.
Some corrosion processes can result in a protective layer that
slows down the corrosion process, such as with aluminum, titanium, and alloys with sufficient chromium. The second step of
the corrosive wear process consists of wearing away the reaction
product film, as a result of sliding, and exposing a fresh surface
for corrosive attack.
Surface-fatigue wear is closely related to the general phenomenon of fatigue of materials in that there is a characteristic interrelation between the stresses in the contacting materials and the
number of cycles required to produce fracture. As stressing and
unstressing of the material of occluding continue, a subsurface
crack propagates. For a long time, the material appears to be quite
unaffected by this stress cycling, but suddenly, perhaps after a
few hundred thousand hours of loading, a particle spalls off the
surface, and thereafter, deterioration of the surface and flaking of
fragments become rapid.
There are a few marginal processes that are often classified as
forms of wear that include actions of fretting, erosion, cavitation,
and impact. Each type describes a different way in which the load
and sliding action are introduced. Briefly, fretting wear arises when
contacting surfaces undergo oscillatory tangential displacement of
small amplitude. Erosion wear is a process in which a particle carried in a fluid medium hits a solid surface and removes material
from this surface. Cavitation-erosion wear occurs as a result of the
cavitation of a liquid. The liquid is put through a cycle of compression, then tension, and then compression again, and so on.
Impact wear is a short sliding motion, such as grit-blasting, where
two solid bodies interact for an exceptionally short time interval.
Factors Influencing Abrasive Wear

The amount of abrasive wear in volume loss (V) is found to be
proportional to the size of the actual contact area. This actual contact area is proportional to the pressure applied (P) and inversely
proportional to the hardness of the surface (H). In addition, the
wear increases as the distance of travel by one surface increases.
In dentistry, the distance is often in the form of the chewing
cycle (N). Mathematically, the relationship is expressed as V ∝
(N.P/H). This equation does not necessarily hold true in all cases
but clearly points out the influence of three major factors on wear.
In reality, many other factors may be involved in the wear process,

Mechanical Properties of Solids

81

such as surface roughness, temperature, and environment (e.g.,
moisture). Roughness increases the actual contact area and the
wear. Polishing to attain a smooth surface is highly advisable to
reduce wear. The thermal properties of the surface become important when sliding takes place at high speeds, such as grinding and
polishing. The oral environment provides natural lubrication that
reduces wear. Soft foods reduce wear because they serve to cushion and lubricate during mastication. The resulting wear debris
may be washed away by saliva or may be trapped between the two
opposing surfaces, creating so-called three-body abrasive wear.
This phenomenon occurs when the diet is impregnated with fine,
solid particles and during brushing of the teeth with an abrasive.
Improvement of Wear Resistance

According to the mathematical relationship described in the last
section, hardness is the only material-related factor that can be
altered to influence wear behavior. For polymers, there are two ways
to improve wear resistance: one is to increase the molecular weight
during polymerization, and the other is to incorporate fine particles
of high strength and hardness. For example, the wear resistance of
resin composite is substantially improved by the addition of fine
ceramic particles or glass beads and increasing the degree of cure of
the resin during polymerization (Chapter 5, Fillers). To reduce the
impact of wear, the selection of the opposing material is of paramount importance. For example, porcelain teeth should not be
allowed to oppose natural dentition or resin composite restorations.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why do prostheses sometimes fail under a very small force even though the
strength of the prosthetic material is relatively great?

Strength of Tooth Structure
The relatively wide variation in mechanical properties of human
tooth structure is attributed to the technical problems associated
with preparing and testing such small specimens, which in some
instances are less than 1 mm in length. The results reported in one
study are shown in Table 4-1. This study investigated the effect
of enamel-rod orientation by propagating cracks in the occlusal
surface and in axial sections in directions parallel and perpendicular to the occlusal surface. The cracks in the axial enamel
section were longer in the direction perpendicular to the occlusal
surface rather than parallel to the surface. The cracks that propagated toward the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) were arrested
and did not penetrate the DEJ into dentin. The fracture toughness of dentin varied by a factor of 3 as a function of enamel-rod
orientation. The elastic modulus of enamel also varied between
the occlusal surface and the axial section. The results of this study
demonstrate that the mechanical properties of tooth structure are
a function of microstructural orientation. Indentation energy is a
recently introduced property that is used to predict the machinability and wear behavior of ceramics. Research data suggest that
during indentation or cutting, brittle enamel may be removed
by microfracture, whereas dentin may be removed by forming
ductile chips.
Although the data in Table 4-1 indicate a variation in the properties of enamel and dentin from one type of tooth to another, the
difference is more likely the result of variations within individual
teeth than between teeth. The properties of enamel vary somewhat

82

PA RT I

TABLE 4-1

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

Properties of Tooth Structure (Human Third Molars)

Microhardness Indentation Method

Occlusal Enamel

Axial Enamel

Dentin

Hardness (GPa)

3.23

3.03

0.58

Toughness (MPa.m1/2)

0.77

0.52 (⊥) 1.30 ( ⎜⎜)

—

Hardness (GPa)

3.62

3.37

0.57

Toughness (MPa.m1/2)

94

80

20

Indentation energy (µJ)

2.6

2.7

7.5

⊥, Enamel axial section perpendicular to occlusal surface; ⎜⎜, enamel axial section parallel to occlusal surface.
From Xu HHK, Smith DT, Jahanmir S, Romberg E, Kelly JR, Thompson VP, Rekow ED: Indentation damage and mechanical properties of human enamel and dentin. J Dent Res 77:472–480, 1998.

with the position on the tooth; that is, occlusal enamel is stronger
than enamel on other surfaces of the tooth. Also, the properties of
enamel vary according to the microscopic structure. For example,
enamel is stronger under longitudinal compression than when
subjected to lateral compression. On the other hand, the properties of dentin appear to be independent of structure, regardless of
the direction of compressive stress.
The tensile properties of tooth structure have also been measured. Dentin is considerably stronger in tension (50 MPa) than
enamel (10 MPa). Although the compressive strengths of enamel
and dentin are comparable, the proportional limit and modulus of
elasticity of enamel are greater than the corresponding values for
dentin. The higher modulus of elasticity of enamel results in less
resilience compared with dentin.
Typically, the energy of a biting or chewing event is absorbed
by the food bolus during mastication and by the teeth, periodontal ligament, and bone. Also, the design of the tooth enables the
tooth to absorb significant static and dynamic (impact) energies.
As can be seen in Figure 4-7, the modulus of resilience of dentin is
greater than that of enamel and is better able to absorb impact
energy. Enamel is a brittle substance with a comparatively high
modulus of elasticity, a low proportional limit in tension, and a
low modulus of resilience.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the difference in appearance between a stress-strain graph for a
material that has high strength, high stiffness, and high ductility and one for a
material that is weak, flexible, and more brittle?

Selection of Dental Materials
Deciding on the best treatment option is a multifactor task that
involves the condition of the tooth to be restored, the patient’s
condition and desire for an esthetic appearance, and the clinician’s
preference and prior experience. The next step is selecting the type
of restorative material made of any of the four general classes of
materials discussed in Chapter 2. The design of the prosthesis or
the cavity preparation often depends on the physical (Chapter 3)
and mechanical characteristics of the type of material selected. The
goal is to distribute the stresses uniformly within the prosthesis or
the supporting tooth or tissue substrates and avoid stress concentration for the longevity of the restorations. You will learn more about
the principles of design in respective operative and prosthodontic
classes. Here, we examine how to select suitable materials based
on their mechanical characteristics to facilitate treatment options.

When the responses of materials to external forces are observed
from a stress point of view, they are described in terms of proportional limit, elastic limit, yield strength (proof stress), ultimate
strength, and breaking strength. If the concern is about deformation, they are described as brittle or ductile, and their flexibility, ductility, and malleability are measured. If the ability of the
devices to dissipate impact energy during service is required, their
moduli of resilience and toughness must be calculated. All categories of these descriptions can include fracture. When a restoration
fractures, should this be attributed to a lack of strength, shortness
in ductility, or not enough toughness? The answer depends on the
function of the prosthesis and how the material fractured. The
fracture of a mesial-occlusal-distal (MOD) composite restoration
resulting in the loss of a proximal box could have been caused
by poor preparation design that led to a stress concentration that
eventually weakened the strength of the restoration. During the
adjustment of the clasp of an RPD, we can easily break the clasp
after numerous episodes of adjustment, but pulling the clasp apart
by tension would be impossible. Continuous bending of the clasp
consumed this material’s ductility and resulted in the fracture of
the clasp as the ductility was exhausted. A denture that is accidentally dropped on a hard floor and breaks indicates that the denture
cannot absorb all the energy from impact, and that this excess
energy is dissipated by the denture fracturing. Depending on the
potential mode of fracture, the selection criteria could change.
Fracture is not the only concern for material selection. From the
previous discussion of the three-unit FDP (Figure 4-3, A), we realize that elastic deformation occurs in the form of flexing as load is
applied on the pontic. Flexing can cause the two abutment teeth to
be pulled laterally toward the pontic. This action can cause loosening of the abutment teeth or cement debonding over time. If the
span of the FDP increases as additional pontic units are added, the
degree of flexing multiplies. Using a material of greater elastic modulus will limit the elastic deformation relative to the force applied.
For RPDs, the metal framework needs to be rigid to maintain the
denture’s fit for uniform distribution of the stresses on the supporting soft tissues. Rigidity of the framework can be achieved with
proper design and the selection of materials that have greater elastic
modulus. The retentive clasp discussed earlier may require mechanical properties that are different from that of the framework, especially the ability to be adjusted without fracture. The framework
and the retentive clasps can be made separately and joined together
later through soldering. Even though high elastic moduli are often
associated with high-strength materials, it is important to emphasize that the elastic modulus addresses only the correlation of the
stress and strain during the elastic deformation. We will discuss in

CHAPTER 4

2400

83

300
270

2100

Zirconia
x
E = 210 GPa
CS = 2000 MPa

240

1800
x

210
1500

Stress (MPa)

Mechanical Properties of Solids

CAD/CAM Block
for Inlay
E = 25.0 GPa
FS = 216 MPa

180

1200

Resin-based
Composite
x E = 11.3 GPa
FS = 150 MPa

150
120

Co-Cr Alloy for
Partial
E = 234 GPa
PL = 510 MPa
Ductility = 5%

900

600

x
90
60

Type IV Gold
E = 95 GPa
PL = 505 MPa
Ductility = 8%

300

Heat-cured
Denture Resin
E = 2.6 GPa
FS = 99 MPa

30

0

0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

0.0

1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

Strain (%)

• Figure 4-19 Stress-strain curves of six commercial products representing four general classes of materials. The mechanical properties shown are elastic modulus (E), proportional limit (PL), flexure strength
(FS), compressive strength (CS), and ductility.

Chapter 13, Elasticity and Viscoelasticity, that an elastic modulus
much lower than those of metals and ceramics is essential for making impressions.
The stress-strain curves of six commercial products for four
classes of materials are shown in Figure 4-19 in two plots. Most
of the restorative materials available are brittle, except for metals.
We should emphasize that brittle simply refers to the inability of
a material to deform plastically before fracture. Brittleness is not
associated with the strength of a material, even though most highstrength materials used in dentistry are brittle. The brittle nature
with a high elastic limit makes zirconia suitable for compression
loading. Normally, zirconia is not recommended for constructing bridges. With improvements in fracture toughness, zirconia is
being used to make bridges, but these require a larger cross section for connectors. Co-Cr alloys for RPDs have the highest elastic
modulus and can retain adequate rigidity with less bulk of material.
Tensile-strength values may not be meaningful because the framework will fail to function as soon as it is plastically deformed. The
5% ductility of Co-Cr alloy shown in Figure 4-19 means that if the
retentive clasp is made of this alloy, the ductility should allow a few
adjustments of the clasp. Type IV gold has an elastic modulus high
enough to resist flexing of FDPs made from this material. The high
yield strength is good for preventing plastic deformation but may
prove disadvantageous if one needs to burnish the margin. Solidstate transformation can be used (Chapter 2, Solid-State Reactions
in High Noble and Noble Alloy Systems) to soften the alloy, making the process of burnishing the margins easier. The process of age
hardening will bring the alloy back to a higher elastic modulus and

high yield strength for normal use. The hardness of the material
usually increases along with the elastic modulus. These alloys have
elastic moduli 3 to 7 times that of the enamel (E = 33.6 GPa). One
should consider the impact of the potential hardness of the metal
on the opposing restoration or tooth structure.
The right plot in Figure 4-19 shows one denture resin and
two composites. The computer-aided design/computer-aided
manufacturing (CAD-CAM) block in this diagram is a highly
filled composite designed for digital milling. In the discussion
regarding stress concentration, the use of restorative materials of
similar elastic modulus to that of the tooth was noted as desirable. The elastic moduli of both the resin and composite materials are between those of enamel and dentine. Some composites
have elastic moduli as low as that of the denture resin shown in
Figure 4-19. Because they have elastic moduli lower than that of
enamel, they are not likely to induce excessive wear on the natural
dentition. Denture resin has the lowest elastic modulus with the
highest flexibility. Denture bases are not bound in a limited space
like tooth cavity preparations. They are resting on soft tissue and
may flex more than fixed restorations. Greater flexibility allows
them to flex without the risk of fracture. The mechanical properties of these restorative materials and how their properties are used
will be discussed in the respective chapters.
The magnitude of mastication forces is unknown for individual
patients, to the extent that the dentist cannot estimate the stresses
that will be induced in dental restorations. However, patients
who exhibit evidence of extreme bruxism represent a higher-risk
population for the fracture of brittle restorative materials. The

84

PA RT I

General Classes and Properties of Dental Materials

knowledge of the relationships between the properties of restorative materials known to exhibit excellent long-term survival performance is constantly reinforced by clinical experience. As is true
for the field of engineering, the dental profession is aware that the
best test of a successful restorative material is the test of time under
actual clinical conditions.

Acknowledgment

Selected Readings

Irwin G: Analysis of stresses and strains near the end of a crack traversing
a plate, J Apple Mech 24:361–364, 1957.
Based on the shortcomings of Griffith’s theory for ductile materials,
Irwin modified Griffith’s equations by accounting for inelastic behavior at the crack tips.
Lund JR, Byrne JP: Leonardo da Vinci’s tensile strength tests: Implications for the discovery of engineering mechanics, Civil Eng Environ
Syst 18:243–250, 2001.
Rabinowicz E: Friction and Wear of Materials, 2nd ed, New York, 1995,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Stanford JW, Weigel KV, Paffenbarger GD, et al: Compressive properties
of hard tooth tissue, J Am Dent Assoc 60:746–756, 1960.
Although this study was published in 1960, it remains one of the most
authoritative references on the mechanical properties of tooth structure.
Van Vlack LH: Elements of Materials Science and Engineering, 6th ed,
Reading, MA, 1989, Addison-Wesley.
This reference book presents an overview of the structure of matter,
the properties of materials, and engineering.
Weibull W: A statistical theory of the strength of materials. Ingeniörsvetenskapakademiens. Handlinger Nr. 151, Generalstabens Litografiska
Anstalts Förlag, 1939, Stockholm.

Callister WD, Rethwisch DG: Materials Science and Engineering: An
Introduction, Hoboken, NJ, 2009, John Wiley & Sons.
Davis JR (Ed): Metals Handbook, Desk Edition, Metals Park, OH, 1998,
ASM International.
This handbook provides a comprehensive overview of metals and
metal technology including properties and selection criteria, processing information, and testing and inspection guidelines on failure
analysis, mechanical testing, nondestructive testing, metallography,
fractography, and quality control.
Frechette VD: Failure Analysis of Brittle Materials, Westerville, OH, 1990,
The American Ceramic Society.
This classic textbook on fracture surface analysis provides an excellent
overview of fractographic techniques. Since many dental materials are
brittle in nature, the identification of fracture patterns and the crack
origin are useful to identify the principal sites of crack initiation.
Griffith AA: The phenomena of rupture and flow in solids, Philos Trans
Royal Soc A 221:163–198, 1920.
Griffith proposed that minute cracks in a general glass act as a stress raiser
that reduces the theoretical strength of glass to 1% of that predicted for its
theoretical strength. He also concluded that the magnitude of the fracture
stress and the square root of the critical flaw depth was a constant.

The author wishes to acknowledge Dr. Kenneth J. Anusavice for
his contribution to the earlier editions of this chapter.

Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Callister WD, Rethwisch DG: Materials Science and Engineering: An
Introduction, Hoboken, NJ, 2009, John Wiley & Sons.
Davis JR (Ed): Metals Handbook, Desk Edition, Metals Park, OH, 1998,
ASM International.
This handbook provides a comprehensive overview of metals and
metal technology including properties and selection criteria, processing information, and testing and inspection guidelines on failure
analysis, mechanical testing, nondestructive testing, metallography,
fractography, and quality control.
Frechette VD: Failure Analysis of Brittle Materials, Westerville, OH, 1990,
The American Ceramic Society.
This classic textbook on fracture surface analysis provides an excellent overview of fractographic techniques. Since many dental materials are brittle in nature, the identification of fracture patterns and
the crack origin are useful to identify the principal sites of crack
initiation.
Griffith AA: The phenomena of rupture and flow in solids, Philos Trans
Royal Soc A 221:163–198, 1920.
Griffith proposed that minute cracks in a general glass act as a stress
raiser that reduces the theoretical strength of glass to 1% of that predicted for its theoretical strength. He also concluded that the magnitude

of the fracture stress and the square root of the critical flaw depth was
a constant.
Irwin G: Analysis of stresses and strains near the end of a crack traversing
a plate, J Apple Mech 24:361–364, 1957.
Based on the shortcomings of Griffith’s theory for ductile materials,
Irwin modified Griffith’s equations by accounting for inelastic behavior at the crack tips.
Lund JR, Byrne JP: Leonardo da Vinci’s tensile strength tests: Implications for the discovery of engineering mechanics, Civil Eng Environ
Syst 18:243–250, 2001.
Rabinowicz E: Friction and Wear of Materials, 2nd ed, New York, 1995,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Stanford JW, Weigel KV, Paffenbarger GD, et al: Compressive properties
of hard tooth tissue, J Am Dent Assoc 60:746–756, 1960.
Although this study was published in 1960, it remains one of the most
authoritative references on the mechanical properties of tooth structure.
Van Vlack LH: Elements of Materials Science and Engineering, 6th ed, Reading, MA, 1989, Addison-Wesley.
This reference book presents an overview of the structure of matter, the
properties of materials, and engineering.
Weibull W: A statistical theory of the strength of materials. Ingeniörsvetenskapakademiens. Handlinger Nr. 151, Generalstabens Litografiska
Anstalts Förlag, 1939, Stockholm.

84.e1

Part II

Direct Restorative Materials
5 Resin-Based Composites, 87
6 Bonding and Bonding Agents, 115
7 Dental Cements, 128
8 Dental Amalgams, 153

85

5

Resin-Based Composites
OUTLINE
History of Composites

Repair of Composites

Composition and Function

Composite-Based Indirect Restorations

Classification of Dental Composites

Selection Criteria for Posterior Composites

Properties of Resin-Based Composites

Photocuring Training, Evaluation, and Process Management

Finishing and Polishing of Composites

KEY TERMS
Activation Process by which sufficient energy is provided to
induce an initiator to generate free radicals and cause polymerization to begin.
Activator Source of energy used to activate an initiator and
produce free radicals; the source of energy can be an electrondonating chemical, light, and/or heat.
C-factor Configuration factor. This represents the ratio between
the bonded surface area of a resin-based composite restoration and the nonbonded or free surface area. The greater the
C-factor, the greater the stress that develops at the restoration
margin, which can lead to gap formation, marginal breakdown
and leakage, and other problems (e.g., secondary caries).
Chemical-activated/self-cured/resin/composite Composite system consisting of two pastes—one containing an initiator and
the other an activator—which, when mixed together, release
free radicals that initiate polymerization. Many terms have been
used throughout the development of this material; we will use
either chemical-activated or self-cured in this book.
Coupling agent A compound that provides chemical bonds between two dissimilar classes of materials. For example, organosilane compounds are applied to the surfaces of silicate-based
fillers to ensure that they are chemically bonded to the resin
matrix of a dental composite.
Degree of conversion (DC) Percentage of carbon–carbon double
bonds (–C = C–) converted to single bonds (–C—C–) during curing to form a polymeric resin. Also known as degree of cure and
degree of monomer-to-polymer conversion.
Dental composite Highly crosslinked polymeric materials
reinforced by a dispersion of amorphous silica, glass, crystalline, mineral, or organic resin filler particles and/or short fibers
bonded to the matrix by a coupling agent. In dentistry, it is
often called just “composite.”
Depth of cure Depth or thickness of a light-cured resin that has
attained adequate mechanical strength from polymerization
when exposed to a light source under a specific set of conditions.
Dual-cured resin Dental composite that contains both chemical-activated and light-activated components to initiate

polymerization and potentially overcome the limitations of
either the chemical- or light-cured system when used alone.
Filler Inorganic, glass, and/or organic-resin particles that are dispersed in a resin matrix to increase rigidity, strength, and wear
resistance and to decrease thermal expansion, water sorption,
and polymerization shrinkage. Radiopaque fillers can also be
added to impart radiopacity to dental composites. Aluminofluorosilicate fillers can be added to release fluoride from dental
composites.
Flowable composite Hybrid composite with reduced filler level
and a narrower particle-size distribution to increase flow and
promote intimate adaptation to prepared tooth surfaces. Flowable composites are often used as the first layer of a cavity filling
to improve filling adaptation to the cavity.
Free radical An atom or group of atoms (R) with an unpaired electron (•). R•-producing reactions initiate and propagate polymerization and eventually lead to a final set.
Gel point/gelation The point in the polymerization reaction
where sufficient crosslinks have formed to produce a rigid,
glassy state in which internal flow among the developing
polymer chains has stopped. All but localized molecular motion
has stopped. After the gel point, stresses cannot be relieved but
instead continue to increase and concentrate near the bonded
interfaces. Thus, reducing the polymerization rate provides
more time for adjacent polymer chain segments to slip among
themselves to lower-energy configurations and relieve developing stresses before the polymerization reaches gel point.
Inhibitor A chemical added to resin systems to minimize spontaneous polymerization to extend the storage life of the resin
through free radical–scavenging mechanisms. It also increases
the working time of self-cured resin composites.
Initiator A free radical−forming chemical used to start the polymerization reaction. It enters into the chemical reaction and
becomes part of the final polymer compound; thus it is not a
catalyst, although it is often incorrectly labeled as such.
Light-cured/light-activated resin/composite Resin or particlefilled resin consisting of a single component that becomes polymerized through the use of a photosensitive initiator system

87

88

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

(typically camphorquinone and an amine) and a light-source
activator (typically visible blue light). Photocured and photoinitiated are also used in the literature; we will use either light-activated or light-cured in this book.
Matrix A plastic resin material that forms a continuous phase
upon curing and binds the reinforcing filler particles.

Oxygen-inhibited layer The thin surface region of a polymerized
resin containing unreacted methacrylate groups arising from
dissolved oxygen, which acts to inhibit the free radical polymerization curing reaction; also known as the air-inhibited layer.
Resin Blend of monomers and/or macromolecules with other
components that form a material with a set of useful properties.

The gold standard of reference for restorative filling materials is
amalgam. However, amalgam has its own disadvantages, such as
(1) poor esthetics, (2) unfounded concerns about health hazards
from the leakage of mercury, and (3) waste-disposal concerns.
Because resin-based composites can be made to match the natural
appearance of teeth, they have become the most popular of the
esthetic or tooth-colored filling materials and are widely used for a
variety of dental applications.
Another key advantage of resin materials is that they can be
made in a range of consistencies, from highly fluid to rigid pastes,
which allows them to be conveniently manipulated and molded to
a custom-made form, and then converted through a polymerization curing reaction to a hard, strong, attractive, and durable solid.

shrinkage, radiopacity, and thermal expansion compared with
unfilled acrylic. However, these composites suffered from roughening of the surface as a result of the selective abrasion of the
softer resin matrix surrounding the harder filler particles and were
not very esthetic. To improve surface smoothness and retain or
improve the physical and mechanical properties of traditional
composites, small-particle-filled composites were developed using
inorganic fillers ground to a size range of about 0.5 to 3 μm but
with a broad size distribution allowing a higher filler loading (80%
to 90% by weight or 65% to 77% by volume). This resulted not
only in smoother surfaces but also greater wear resistance and
some decrease in polymerization shrinkage. Further advances in
the filler component have resulted in microfill composites and
nanocomposites, hybrid composites, and packable and flowable
composites, just to name a few.
Other advances with the monomer component provide better
chemical and mechanical properties, reduced shrinkage, color and
storage stability, biocompatibility, and other features. Today, resin
matrix-forming monomers in composite resins are highly complex
and use a variety of monomers and monomer blends of various
molecular weights and functions.
Finally, advances in curing technology have yielded light-cured
systems that make curing resins on demand possible and improve
working time and ease of manipulation. Initially an ultraviolet
(UV) curing system was used, but this system had several drawbacks and was soon replaced by visible blue-light curing systems.
These advances were soon followed by further developments in
curing-lamp technology, going from tungsten light bulbs to lightemitting diodes (LEDs).
Figure 5-1 illustrates the history of and achievements in dental
composites.

History of Composites
During the first half of the 20th century, silicates were the toothcolored material of choice for cavity restoration. Silicates release
fluoride and are excellent for preventing caries, but they become
severely eroded within a few years. Acrylic resins, which are based
on polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), soon replaced silicates for
their tooth-like appearance, insolubility in oral fluids, ease of
manipulation, and low cost. Unfortunately, these acrylic resins
had relatively poor wear resistance and tended to shrink severely
during setting, which caused them to pull away from the cavity
walls, thereby producing crevices or gaps that facilitate leakage
within these gaps. In addition, thermal expansion and contraction
caused further stresses to develop at the cavity margins when hot
or cold beverages and foods were consumed.
These problems were reduced somewhat by incorporating
quartz particles in the resin. The filler does not take part in the setting reaction but occupies space that reduces the number of reactions taking place and the corresponding shrinkage. In addition,
commonly used fillers have a low coefficient of thermal expansion.
However, these filler-reinforced PMMA resins were not very successful, in part because the fillers do not bond chemically to the
resin. Thus defects developed between the fillers and the surrounding resin and led to leakage, staining, and poor wear resistance.
In 1962, Bowen developed a new type of composite material
that largely overcame these problems. Bowen’s main innovations
were bisphenol-A glycidyl dimethacrylate (bis-GMA), a monomer
that forms a crosslinked matrix that is highly durable, and a surface treatment using an organic silane compound called a coupling
agent to bond the filler particles to the resin matrix. Current toothcolored restorative materials continue to use this technology, but
many further innovations have been introduced since then.
In the late 1960s, a category now known as traditional composites (also known as conventional or macrofill composites) was
developed; this contained very large particles of ground amorphous silica and quartz, which imparted significant improvements in mechanical properties, water sorption, polymerization

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the three essential components of resin composite materials?

Composition and Function
Dental composites are made up of three major components: a
highly crosslinked polymeric resin matrix; a dispersion of glass,
silica, crystalline, metal oxide, resin-reinforcing particles, short
fibers, or their combinations as filler; and a coupling agent
bonding filler to the matrix. In addition, there is an activator–
initiator system that converts the soft, moldable filling material
to a hard, durable restoration, and there are combinations of
pigments to match the color of tooth structure. Other additives
include UV absorbers to improve color stability; inhibitors to
extend storage life and increase working time for chemical-activated resins; and components to enhance performance, appearance, and durability.

Resin-Based Composites

CHAPTER 5

89

Composite Refinements
1955–2020
Nonbonded
composites

Dentin-bonded
composites

Acid-etching and
enamel bonding

1950

1960

Original
development

1970

3 part, 2 part, 1 part
Dentin bonding systems

1980

MACROFILL
Self-cured
composites

1990

FLOWABLE
composites

MICROFILL
composites

MIDFILL
composites

2000

Self-cured
UV-cured

2020

BULK FILL, UNIVERSAL,
SELF-ADHESIVE &
BIOACTIVE
composites

PACKABLE
composites

MIDFILL
composites

2010

NANOFILL &
MINIHYBRID
NANOHYBRID
MIDHYBRID composites
composites
composites
CONTROLLED/
LOW SHRINKAGE
composites
Visible light-cured
(QTH, PAC, Laser, LED)

• Figure 5-1 Chronology of dental composite developments in monomer, filler, bonding, and curing technologies. LED, Light-emitting diodes; QTH, quartz-tungsten-halogen. (Adapted from Bayne SC: Dental
biomaterials: where are we and where are we going? J Dent Educ 69:571−585, 2005.)

O

O
O

O

O

O
OH

OH

bis-GMA
H

O
O

O
O

N
N

O

O
O

H

O

UDMA

O
O

O
O

O

O

TEGDMA
• Figure 5-2 Chemical structure of bisphenol A glycidyl dimethacrylate (bis-GMA), urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA), and triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA).

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What roles do bis-GMA and other high-molecular-weight dimethacrylate
monomers play in the function and performance of dental resins?
Why are diluent monomers used, and what are the tradeoffs for their use?

Matrix
The resin matrix in most dental composites is based on a blend
of aromatic and/or aliphatic dimethacrylate monomers such as
bisphenol A glycidyl methacrylate (bis-GMA) and urethane

dimethacrylate (UDMA) (Figure 5-2) that form crosslinked,
strong, rigid, and durable polymer structures. Note that the methacrylate groups are found at the ends of the chain or at the end of
branching chains. Bis-GMA resin is a dimethacrylate of aromatic
esters synthesized from an epoxy resin of ethylene glycol of bisphenol A and methyl methacrylate. The two −OH groups of this
material forming hydrogen bonds between the monomers make
it extremely viscous. The rigid core of two aromatic groups limits
the ability of bis-GMA molecules to rotate efficiently to participate in the polymerization process that often leaves one of the two

90

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

methacrylate groups unpolymerized. This results in one end of a
bis-GMA becoming part of a polymer chain and the rest of the
molecule becoming a methacrylate terminated pendant group.
The efficiency of polymerization and crosslinking is expressed by
the percentage of reacted (converted) methacrylate groups after
polymerization and is known as the degree of conversion (DC).
Various dimethacrylate resin combinations have been
explored through the years in attempts to reduce viscosity and
increase the DC. The UDMAs have shown particular promise. UDMA resins are any monomer containing one or more
urethane groups (–NH–CO–O–) and two methacrylate end
groups (Figure 5-2).
Because of the large molecular volume of these monomers,
polymerization shrinkage can be as low as 0.9% (average of 1.5%
compared with a range of 2% to 3% for most composites) when
combined with inorganic particulate fillers at levels of up to 88%
by weight. UDMA (about 20 Pa·s) and bis-GMA (about 800
Pa·s, similar to honey on a cold day) are highly viscous and are
difficult to blend and manipulate. Thus varying proportions of
lower-molecular-weight highly fluid monomers such as triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA; 0.005 to 0.05 Pa·s;
Figure 5-2) and other lower-molecular-weight dimethacrylates to
blend with and dilute the viscous components to attain resin
pastes sufficiently fluid for clinical manipulation and for incorporating enough filler to reinforce the cured resin are necessary.
For example, a blend of 75% bis-GMA and 25% TEGDMA by
weight has a viscosity of about 4.3 Pa·s, whereas the viscosity of
a 50% bis-GMA/50% TEGDMA blend is about 0.2 Pa·s (similar to thin syrup). Unfortunately, these smaller, diluent monomers undergo greater polymerization shrinkage that generates
more shrinkage stress, which may cause the formation of marginal gaps and increase the risk of eventual leakage and the problems that may result, partially offsetting the advantage of using
large monomers such as bis-GMA.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What roles do the fillers play in the function and performance of dental
resins?

Filler
Incorporation of fillers, generally between 30% and 70% by volume or 50% and 85% by weight, has transformed resins into
functional materials that withstand the chemical, physical, and
mechanical challenges of the oral environment. In this section,
we will discuss the function of fillers in composites, the required
properties, and types of fillers.

Function of Fillers
Fillers can provide the following benefits:
• Reduction of polymerization shrinkage/contraction. Although
shrinkage varies from one commercial composite to another, it
typically ranges from slightly less than 1% up to about 4% by
volume.
• Reduction in thermal expansion and contraction. As the
overall expansion coefficient decreases with filler loading and
approaches that of tooth tissue, less interfacial stress is produced because of differential volumetric changes while an individual consumes hot and cold foods and beverages.
• Decreased water sorption. Absorbed water softens the resin
and makes it more prone to abrasive wear and staining.

• Reinforcement. As the volume fraction of filler approaches
approximately 70%, abrasion and fracture resistance are raised
to levels approaching those of tooth tissue, thereby increasing
both clinical performance and durability.
• Control of workability/viscosity. Filler loading, filler size, and
the range of particle sizes and shapes all markedly affect the consistency and clinical manipulation of a composite paste. Consistency
and manipulation properties determine the ease of operation,
the skill and time required, and also how reliably a cavity can be
restored free of errors and with the proper interproximal contact,
occlusal anatomy, smoothness, and appearance.
• Imparting radiopacity. Leaking margins, secondary caries,
poor proximal contacts, wear of proximal surfaces, and other
problems cannot be detected adjacent to inherently radiolucent resins. Radiopacity is most often imparted by adding
radiopaque inorganic compounds such as glass filler particles
with heavy-metal atoms, such as barium (Ba), lanthanum (La),
strontium (Sr), ytterbium (Yb), zinc (Zn), or zirconium (Zr).
For optimal diagnostic contrast, the restoration should have a
radiopacity approximately equal to that of enamel, which is
about twice that of dentin. Exceeding the radiopacity of enamel
by a large degree will have the effect of obscuring radiolucent
areas caused by gap formation or secondary caries.
• Fluoride release. Ytterbium fluoride (YbF3) and aluminofluorosilicate glass (traditionally used in glass ionomers) are able to
release fluoride from dental composites.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is there a tradeoff among workability, durability, and esthetics when
fillers are incorporated in resins?

Characteristics of Fillers
In the early versions of dental composites, quartz had been used
extensively as a filler because this material is chemically inert.
Quartz is very hard, making the composite abrasive to opposing
teeth or restorations and difficult to finish and polish to a smooth
surface. So-called amorphous silica has the same composition and
refractive index as quartz; however, silica is not crystalline and not
as hard, thus greatly reducing the abrasiveness of the composite
surface structure and improving its polishability.
The most commonly used glass filler is Ba glass. Although
Ba glass fillers also provide radiopacity, they are not as inert as
quartz or amorphous silica and are slowly leached and weakened
in acidic liquids such as citrus juices, high-pH solutions, and
other oral fluids. The glass filler is also attacked over time by
caries-protective acidulated phosphate fluoride solutions or gels.
Because of the differences in the composition of saliva among
patients, the clinical effects of exposure to saliva are difficult to
predict. However, the implication is that glass-filled composites
will gradually become more susceptible to abrasive wear, and
hence they will have a shorter functional lifetime compared with
silica-reinforced resins.
For acceptable esthetics, the translucency of a composite restoration must be similar to that of tooth structure. Thus the refractive index of the filler must closely match that of the resin. For
bis-GMA and TEGDMA, the refractive indices are approximately
1.55 and 1.46, respectively, and a mixture of the two components
in equal proportions by weight yields a refractive index of approximately 1.50. Most of the glasses and quartz used for fillers have
refractive indices of approximately 1.50, which is adequate for sufficient translucency.

CHAPTER 5

Increasing filler loading improves the most important properties discussed so far; however, there is a limit of loading. For
example, if the particle size were uniform spheres, no matter how
tightly packed the spheres are, as illustrated in the crystalline
structure shown in Chapter 2, Crystalline Structure, the maximal theoretical packing fraction for close-packed spherical structures of uniform size is approximately 74% by volume. However,
smaller particles could still be inserted among the larger spheres.
By extending this process, a continuous distribution of progressively smaller particles can yield a higher filler loading. Therefore a
distribution of particle sizes is used to maximize the volume fraction of filler in composites.
Curing of composites produces an initially smooth, resin-rich
surface, but finishing operations remove the resin matrix from the
perimeter of filler particles, exposing particles that protrude from the
surface. Particles larger than the wavelength of visible light cause light
scattering, which increases opacity and produces a visibly rough texture when the particles are exposed at the surface. A roughened surface
also tends to accumulate stains and plaque. The traditional inorganic
filler particles had average diameters of about 8 to 40 μm. Currently,
particles range from 5 nm to 2 μm. The advantage of using small
particles is that they improve esthetics (appearance) and smoothness
to the tongue (polishability). Oral wear mechanisms complement this
process, such that the ultimate smoothness that can be maintained is
highly dependent on particle size.
However, the smaller the filler particle size, the higher the surface-to-volume ratio available to form polar or hydrogen bonds
with monomer molecules to inhibit their flow and increase viscosity (resistance to mixing and manipulation). Thus less filler can
be added. Therefore there is always a tradeoff among the requirements for workability, durability, and esthetics. The clinician’s
challenge is to make an informed judgment concerning the claims
for the many products offered and to select one that is well suited
to a particular clinical application.

Types of Fillers
Various transparent mineral fillers are employed in formulating
composite resins. These include so-called “soft glass” and borosilicate “hard glass”; fused quartz; aluminum silicate; lithium aluminum silicate (beta-eucryptite, which has a negative coefficient of
thermal expansion); ytterbium fluoride; and barium, strontium,
zirconium, and zinc glasses. More discussion on the particle size
and fabrication of related fillers is provided later in the section on
the classification of composites by filler particle size.
In the quest for improved aesthetics and, hence, smaller particle sizes, two filler systems, organically modified ceramics (ormocer) and polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS), in which a
portion of the reinforcing component operates at molecular scale,
have been introduced.
Ormocer

Ormocer is an acronym for organically modified ceramics. They are
considered to be molecule-sized hybrid structures consisting of inorganic–organic copolymers. These molecular hybrids consist of, for
example, methacrylate-terminated chains grafted onto a central cyclic
polysiloxane 2- to 3-nm particle. These nanoparticles are dispersed on
a molecular scale, and high-molecular-weight, flexible, relatively lowviscosity, crosslinkable molecules (“oligomers”) result. The large spacing between crosslinks resulting from curing produces a low level of
polymerization shrinkage, and the inorganic network provides abrasion resistance through the glasslike structure and low water sorption
resulting from hydrophobicity.

Resin-Based Composites

O

O

O

O
O

O

Si
O

91

O

Si
O

Si
Si

O

O

O
O

O

O

O

O
O

O
Si

Si
O

O

Si
O

Si O
O

O
O

O

O

• Figure 5-3 Methacryl polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane, a 12-sided
silicate cage structure having polymerizable methacrylate pendant groups.
(Courtesy Hybrid Plastics, Inc., Hattiesburg, MS.)

Ormocers are used in the formulation of several commercial
composites (e.g., Definite and Admira, Voco GmbH, Cuxhaven,
Germany; Ceram-X, Dentsply International, York, PA). Whereas
the molecule-sized silicate particles provide some reinforcement,
ground glass and/or other fillers are typically required for sufficient reinforcement. Therefore ormocer is often considered as part
of the matrix of the composite. Advantages of ormocer-based dental materials include limited cure shrinkage, very high biocompatibility, good manipulation properties, and excellent esthetics.
POSS

POSS is an acronym for polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane. The
molecules are 12-sided silicate cages produced from silane and
functionalized to copolymerize with other monomers. A silsesquioxane is a chemical structure with the composition RnSinO1.5n, for
example, (CH3)8Si8O12. For the POSS materials used in dental
applications, the R-group is typically a methacrylate (Figure 5-3).
POSS is a molecule-sized hybrid organic–inorganic oligomeric
compound that can disperse homogeneously in compatible monomers and become covalently incorporated into crosslinked networks
upon curing. Like the ormocer-type materials, the silicate cage structures provide a reinforcing function, but filler particles must also be
included to achieve the balance of mechanical and other properties
required for adequate performance as dental composites. Depending
on the dispersed filler, POSS-based resins are characterized as being
highly polishable and having excellent polish retention, mechanical
properties, and wear resistance. Current commercial products based
on silsesquioxane technology include Artiste Nano-Hybrid Composite (Pentron Clinical, Wallingford, CT).

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What roles do the coupling agents play in the function and performance of
dental resins?

Coupling Agent
As stated previously, it is essential that filler particles be bonded
to the resin matrix. This allows the more flexible polymer matrix
to transfer stresses to the higher-modulus (more rigid and stiffer)

92

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

HO
H2C

Si

O
O CH3
Si O CH3
O CH
3

O

H3C

Silane coupling
agent

O

+ H

H
O

Si O
O
Si O

Silica filler
particle

Si
HO
H2O

OH
HO

O

Si

Si
O
H
Polymerizable
double bond

O

H
O

Si O
O
Si O

Silica filler
particle

+ 3 CH3OH

Si

O
HO

H2C
CH3

• Figure 5-4 The chemical structure of γ-methacryl-oxypropyltrimethoxy silane and an idealized diagram
of how a silane coupling agent is hydrolyzed and becomes attached to silica and glass filler particle surfaces. Such silanized particles are then reactive and can “couple” the particles to the resin matrix by copolymerization with the double bond in the silane propylmethacrylate group (CH2=C(CH3)COO–C3H6–Si–).
(Data taken from Söderholm K-J, Shang S-W: Molecular orientation of silane at the surface of colloidal
silica. J Dent Res 72:1050−1054, 1993.)

filler particles. The chemical bond between the two phases of the
composite is formed by a coupling agent, a difunctional surfaceactive compound that adheres to filler particle surfaces and also
coreacts with the monomer forming the resin matrix. A properly applied coupling agent can impart improved physical and
mechanical properties and inhibit leaching by preventing water
from penetrating along the filler–resin interface.
Although titanates and zirconates can be used as coupling
agents, organosilanes—such as γ-methacryloxypropyl trimethoxysilane—are used most commonly (Figure 5-4). In the presence of water, the methoxy groups (–OCH3) are hydrolyzed to
silanol (–Si–OH) groups, which can bond with other silanols on
the filler surfaces by forming siloxane bonds (–Si–O–Si–). The
organosilane methacrylate groups form covalent bonds with
the resin when the resin is polymerized, thereby completing the
coupling process. Proper coupling by means of organosilanes is
extremely important to the clinical performance of resin-based
composite restorative materials.

Inhibitors
Inhibitors are added to resin systems to minimize or prevent
spontaneous or accidental polymerization of monomers. Inhibitors have a strong reactivity potential with free radicals. If a free
radical is formed, for example, by brief exposure to room lighting
when the material is dispensed, the inhibitor reacts with the free
radical faster than the free radical can react with the monomer.
This prevents the initiation of monomers and subsequent chain
propagation. After all of the inhibitor is consumed, chain propagation can begin. A typical inhibitor is butylated hydroxytoluene
(BHT), which is used in concentrations on the order of 0.01% by
weight. Thus inhibitors have two functions: to extend the resin’s
storage life and to ensure sufficient working time.

Optical Modifiers
For a natural appearance, dental composites must have visual shading and translucency similar to the corresponding properties of
tooth structure. Shading is achieved by adding various pigments
usually consisting of minute amounts of metal oxide particles.
Translucency and opacity are adjusted as necessary to simulate
enamel and dentin. For example, if a class IV incisal area is reconstructed, the translucency of an unmodified composite might allow
too much light to pass through the restoration. As a result, less light
is reflected or scattered back to the observer, who perceives the incisal edge as too dark. This deficiency can be corrected by adding an
opacifier. However, if an excessive amount of opacifier is added, too
much light may be reflected, and the observer then perceives that
the restoration is “too white,” or more correctly, “too high in value”
(Chapter 3, Three Dimensions of Color). To increase the opacity,
the manufacturer adds titanium dioxide and aluminum oxide to
composites in minute amounts (0.001% to 0.007% by weight).
All optical modifiers affect light transmission through a composite. Thus darker shades and greater opacities have a decreased depth
of light-curing ability and require either an increased exposure time
or a thinner layer when cured. Studies have shown that for optimal
polymerization, resins with darker shades and opacifiers should be
placed in thinner layers. This consideration has added importance
when a bonding agent covered by a composite layer is being cured.

Classification of Dental Composites
As the variety of dental composites increases in response to new innovations and needs, there are also several ways of classifying dental
composites, depending on various aspects of the composites. A useful
classification system for composites is one based on filler particle size
and size distribution, as shown in Table 5-1. Dental composites can

CHAPTER 5

TABLE 5-1

Resin-Based Composites

93

Classification of Resin-Based Composites and Indications for Use

Class of Composite

Particle Size and/or Unique Aspects of Filler
Content

Clinical Use

Traditional (large particle, macrofill)

8- to 40-μm glass or silica

High-stress areas

Homogeneous microfill

40-nm silica

Low-stress and subgingival areas that require a
high luster and polish

Heterogeneous microfill (microfilled)

(1) 40-nm silica
(2) larger prepolymerized organic resin particles
containing 10–100 nm silica

Low-stress and subgingival areas where reduced
shrinkage is essential

Nanofill

<100-nm silica or zirconia
Homogeneous independent nanoparticles or
nanoclusters

Anterior and noncontact posterior areas

Hybrid (large particle)

(1) 1- to 20-μm glass
(2) 40-nm silica

High-stress areas requiring improved polishability
(classes I–IV)

Hybrid (midfiller)

(1) 0.1- to 10-μm glass
(2) 40-nm silica

High-stress areas requiring improved polishability
(classes III, IV)

Hybrid (minifiller/SPF*)

(1) 0.1- to 2-μm glass
(2) 40-nm silica

Moderate-stress areas requiring optimal polishability
(classes III, IV)

Nanohybrid

(1) 0.1- to 2-μm glass or resin microparticles
(2) ≤100-nm nanoparticles

Moderate-stress areas requiring optimal polishability
(classes III, IV)

Flowable/Injectable

Commercial composites made flowable, usually
by lowering filler loading

Situations where improved flow is needed (e.g., a
cavity base or liner, a sealant) or where access is
difficult (class II)

Packable/Condensable

Increased loading of midfiller/minifiller hybrid with
macrofillers; elongated, fibrous filler (100 μm in
length); and/or rough branched fillers

Situations where improved condensability is needed
(classes I, II)

Bulk fill

Usually nanohybrids but also involves very high
filler loadings to reduce polymerization shrinkage
and/or stress. The refractive indices of the filler
and monomer are also matched to increase
composite translucency to allow increased light
penetration and allow polymerization at greater
depths.

Large posterior cavity preparations > 4 mm in depth

Universal

Usually nanohybrids but could be nanofills (or
nanofills with prepolymerized particles)

Classes I–V

SPF, small-particle filled.

also be classified based on curing method, manipulation characteristics, application, unique characteristics, and any combination of
these, as discussed in the following sections.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the similarities and differences in the mechanisms involved in
chemical-activated and light-activated dental resins?

Classification by Curing Method
Methacrylate-functionalized monomers polymerize by the addition polymerization mechanism (also known as chain-growth
polymerization) initiated by free radicals. Free radicals can be generated by chemical activation or by external energy activation
(heat, light, or microwave). Because dental composites for direct
placement use chemical activation, light activation, or a combination of the two, only these systems are discussed here.

Chemical-Activated (Self-Cured) Resins
Chemical-activated resins are supplied as two pastes, one of which
contains the benzoyl peroxide initiator, and the other contains
monomers and an aromatic tertiary amine activator (e.g., N,Ndimethyl-p-toluidine). When the two pastes are mixed together, the
amine activates the benzoyl peroxide to form free radicals, and addition polymerization is initiated. There are inherent limitations with
chemical activation. First, air is incorporated during mixing, leading
to the formation of pores that weaken the structure and trap oxygen,
which inhibits polymerization on the inner surfaces of the pores.
Second, the operator has no control over the working time
after the two components have been mixed. Therefore both insertion and contouring must be completed quickly once the resin
components are mixed. Thus today, they are mainly used for restorations and large foundation structures (buildups) that are not
readily cured with a light source.
Third, the reactivity of oxygen to a radical is much higher
than that of a monomer inhibiting polymerization on the

94

PA RT I I

• Box 5-1

Direct Restorative Materials

Advantages and Disadvantages of
Chemical-Activated (Self-Cured) Resins

• Box 5-2

Advantages and Disadvantages of LightActivated (Light-Cured) Resins

Advantages

Advantages

Convenience and simplicity: no equipment needed, hazard-free
Long-term storage stability
Manipulation of working/setting time by varying proportions
Degree of cure equal throughout material if mixed properly
Marginal stress buildup during curing is much lower than for light-cured
resins because of relatively slower rates of crosslink formation.

No mixing needed, thus low porosity, less staining, stronger
No aromatic amine accelerator, thus greatly improved color stability
“Command” setting (upon exposure to an intense blue light). This means
that working time is controlled, at will, by the clinician.
Small increments of composite can be polymerized at a time, allowing the
use of multiple shades within a single restoration and accommodating
for shrinkage within each increment as opposed to bulk shrinkage.

Disadvantages
Mixing causes air entrapment, leading to porosity that weakens the material
and increases susceptibility to staining. This has been reduced by the
use of mixing syringes.
Aromatic amine accelerators oxidize and turn yellow with time (i.e., color
instability).
Difficult to mix evenly, causing unequal degree of cure and, consequently,
poor mechanical properties

surface. During the inhibition period, this oxygen diffuses into
the resin and is consumed by the radicals formed. This reaction
forms an oxygen-inhibited layer. The thickness of the oxygeninhibited layer is dependent on the viscosity of the resin, the
solubility of oxygen in the monomer, and the initiating system
used.
Fourth, self-cured resins tend to have initial yellow off-color
and lower color stability as a result of the aromatic amine. This is
another reason self-cured resins are not used as direct restorations.
Box 5-1 lists the advantages and disadvantages of chemicalactivated resins.

Light-Activated (Light-Cured) Resins
To overcome the problems associated with chemical activation,
systems using a photosensitive initiator system and a light source
for activation were developed. The first light-activated systems
were formulated for UV light, which has been replaced by visible blue-light–activated systems, with great improvements in the
quality of the cured composites (Box 5-2). Light-curable dental
composites are supplied as a single paste contained in a lightproof
syringe or capsule because there is no chemical activator in the
material. The free radical–initiating system, consisting of a photosensitizer and an amine co-initiator, is contained in this paste.
As long as these two components are not exposed to light, they
do not interact. However, exposure to light in the blue region
(wavelength of about 468 nm) produces an excited state of the
photosensitizer, which then interacts with the amine to form
free radicals that initiate addition polymerization (Figure 5-5).
Camphorquinone (CQ) is a commonly used photosensitizer that
absorbs blue light with wavelengths between 400 and 500 nm.
Only small quantities of CQ are required (0.2% by weight or
less in the paste). A number of amine initiators are suitable for
interaction with CQ, such as dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate
(DMAEMA), which is also present at low levels of about 0.15%
by weight.
In addition to avoiding the porosity of chemical-activated resins, light-activated materials allow the operator to complete insertion and contouring before curing is initiated. Furthermore, once
curing is initiated, an exposure time of 40 s or less is required to
light-cure a 2-mm-thick layer, compared with several minutes for

Disadvantages
Limited cure depth: necessary to build up in layers of about 2 mm
The marginal stress buildup during curing is much higher than in self-cured
resins. This is a result of faster crosslinking, and thus reduced time for
chains to slide among themselves and relax interfacial stress buildup
resulting from cure shrinkage.
Mildly sensitive to normal room illumination (thus, a crust will form when
exposed too long to an examination light)
A special lamp is needed to initiate curing.
Poor lamp accessibility in posterior and interproximal areas; requires extra
exposure time and care in placement and maintaining lamp tip angle
and distance for optimal results
Darker shades require longer exposure times.
Cure is affected by additives such as ultraviolet absorbers for color
stabilization, fluorescent dyes for clinical aesthetics, or excessive
inhibitor concentration. They all absorb light or prevent reaction.
Problems with lamps include the following:
Glare is harmful to clinic personnel; use protective glasses or filters.
Except for light-emitting diode (LED) lamps, curing light generates
substantial heat and will cause pain at 2 to 3 mm in about 20 sec.
Quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH) bulbs dim with age; therefore, use
proper instrumentation to monitor output irradiance.
The lamp wavelength must be matched with the resin photoinitiation system.
The irradiance of the light decreases with distance to the log scale.
The curing angle is critical; maximal irradiance is delivered
perpendicular (90°) to the resin surface.
Training is required to develop best-practice techniques for optimum
intraoral exposure to maximize the degree of cure.
Incomplete curing owing to the previously described problems with lamps.

self-cured materials. Finally, light-cured systems are not as sensitive to oxygen inhibition as are the self-cured systems. Because
of these advantages, visible light−activated composites are more
widely used than chemical-activated materials.
However, light-cured composites have inherent limitations.
For example, they must be placed incrementally when the bulk
exceeds approximately 2 to 3 mm because of the limited depth
of light penetration. Thus light-cured composites can actually
require more time when making large restorations (e.g., in class II
cavity preparations). The depth of cure has been raised to at least
4 mm with the development of bulk-fill composites (see Bulk-Fill
Composites section). Other issues are related to the light-curing
unit and are discussed in three areas: the curing lamps, the depth
of cure, and the safety precautions for using lamps.
Box 5-2 lists the advantages and disadvantages of lightactivated resins.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the tradeoffs among the several types of light sources used to
photoactivate dental restorative resins?

CHAPTER 5

Resin-Based Composites

95

Blue light
468 nm

Photo-excitation
Camphorquinone in
excited “triplet” state
(CQ*)
Camphorquinone (CQ)

2 DMAEMA

Complexation

1. CQ abstracts an H-atom
from the −CH2 − in the amine
2. Complex breaks down
into free radicals

“Exciplex”
Photo-excited complex
(DMAEMA:)2CQ*

Free radicals are derived from both
the amine and camphorquinone
(2 DMAEMA• and •CQ•)

• Figure 5-5 The light-cured process is activated when a diketone photosensitizer, such as camphorquinone (CQ) absorbs a quantum of blue light and forms an excited-state complex (exciplex) with an electron
donor such as an amine (e.g., dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate). In the gure, “••” denotes the unshared
pair of electrons “donated” by the amines to the > C = O (ketone) groups in CQ. While in this activated
complex, CQ extracts a hydrogen atom from the α-carbon adjacent to the amine group, and the complex
decomposes into amine and CQ free radicals. The CQ free radical is readily inactivated. Thus in photoinitiation, only the amine free radicals act to initiate the addition polymerization reaction.

Curing Lamps

The two main types of lamps currently used for photoinitiation of
the polymerization process are quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH)
lamps and LED lamps, with LED lamps quickly overtaking QTH
lamps in popularity.
QTH or halogen lamps have a quartz bulb with a tungsten
filament that irradiates both UV and white light, which must
be filtered to remove heat and all wavelengths except those in
the violet-blue range (about 400 to 500 nm) to match the photoabsorption range of CQ. The irradiance of the bulb (200 to
400 mW/cm2) diminishes with use, so a calibration meter is
required to measure the irradiance.
LED lamps use a solid-state electronic process to emit radiation
only in the blue part of the visible spectrum, between 440 and 480 nm,

and do not require filters. LEDs require low wattage, can be batterypowered and cordless, generate very little heat, and are quiet
because no cooling fan is needed. Initially, they produced similar
irradiance as QTH lamps (200 to 400 mW/cm2), but the latest
versions are more intense and use two or more LED units to both
increase irradiance (>1000 mW/m2) and extend the wavelength
range. As such, significantly less time is needed to cure the composite using LED lamps. Their light bulbs are also cheaper to replace
(up to a third of the price of QTH light bulbs) and more reliable.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the benefits and drawbacks of increasing the irradiance of curing
lamps?

96

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Polymerization is initiated when a critical concentration of free
radicals is formed. This requires that a particular number of photons be absorbed by the initiator system, which is directly related
to the wavelength, irradiance, and time of exposure. For maximum
curing, a radiant energy influx of approximately 16 J/cm2 is
required for a 2-mm-thick layer of resin. This can be delivered by a
40-s exposure to a lamp emitting 400 mW/cm2 (40 s × 400 mW/
cm2 = 16,000 mJ/cm2 or 16 J/cm2). By the law of reciprocity, the
same result can be produced by a 20-s exposure at 800 mW/cm2 or
an exposure of about 13 s with a 1200-mW/cm2 lamp. Thus
increasing the irradiance of the lamp increases the rate and degree
of cure. However, research studies have shown that a longer-thancalculated time might be needed when higher-irradiance light is
used. In addition, faster curing with higher-irradiance light sources
can increase shrinkage stress, as discussed in the following section.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
How does lamp irradiance affect the depth of cure?
What are the most important factors that affect the depth of cure for a lamp
with a given irradiance?

Depth of Cure and Exposure Time

LED lamps with substantially increased irradiances (>1000 mW/
cm2) have opened the possibility of reduced exposure times with
a greater depth of cure. However, with conventional composites,
light absorption and scattering in resin composites reduce the irradiance and DC exponentially with the depth of penetration. Irradiance can be reduced by a factor of 10 to 100 in a 2-mm-thick
layer of composite. This reduces monomer conversion to an unacceptable level at depths greater than 2 to 3 mm. Thus the surface
must be irradiated for a longer time to deliver sufficient energy
well below the surface. Given the limits imposed by the light
scattering and absorption inherent in current restorative resins, the
tradeoffs are such that increased irradiance will allow either shorter
curing times for a given depth of cure or an increased depth of cure
for a given exposure time, but there is little advantage in attempting to achieve both simultaneously. The practical consequence is
that the curing depth is limited to 2 to 3 mm unless excessively
long exposure times are used, regardless of lamp irradiance.
Light attenuation can also vary considerably from one type of
composite to another, depending, for example, on the opacity,
filler size, filler concentration, and pigment shade (i.e., darker
shades and/or more opaque resins require longer curing times).
For these reasons, manufacturers usually recommend curing
times based on a particular curing device for each shade and type
of resin. These recommended times are typically the absolute
minimum required. To maximize both the degree of polymerization and the long-term clinical durability, the clinician should
adjust the exposure time and curing technique to the irradiance
of the light source used. Light is also absorbed and scattered as it
passes through tooth structure, especially dentin, thereby causing
incomplete curing in such critical areas as proximal boxes. Therefore, when one attempts to polymerize the resin through tooth
structure, the exposure time should be increased by a factor of 2
to 3 to compensate for the reduction in light irradiance.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the critical exposure techniques and lamp-maintenance practices
required for optimal curing and ensuring maximal longevity of resin-based
composite restorations?

For the halogen (QTH) lamps, light irradiance is particularly
susceptible to aging of the light source. For all types, faulty orientation of the light tip and too great of a distance between the light
tip and restoration will reduce light output. Several surveys have
shown that the curing units in many dental offices worldwide do
not deliver an adequate light output. The bulbs, LEDs, reflectors,
and internal filters in dental light-curing units of all types have
been shown to degrade with use. In addition, autoclaving, the use
of disinfectant chemicals, or restorative material adhering to the
light tip can dramatically reduce light output.
Consequently, the lamp’s output irradiance should be checked
regularly, and the operator should always place the light tip as
close as possible perpendicular to the restorative material and
maintain this distance and orientation throughout the exposure
time. Studies reported in 2010 and 2011 by Price and colleagues
concluded that specialized training in these technique-related
details substantially improves the intraoral degree of monomerto-polymer conversion that is obtained.
Safety Precautions for Using Curing Lamps

The light emitted by curing units can cause retinal damage if a
person looks directly at the beam. Thus never look directly into
the light tip and minimize observation of the reflected light for
longer periods. Protective eyeglasses and various types of shields
that filter the light are available for increased protection for both
clinical personnel and patients.

Dual-Cured Resins
One way to overcome the limits on curing depth and some of the
other problems associated with light curing is to combine chemical-curing and light-curing components in the same resin. Dualcured resins consist of two light-curable pastes, one containing
benzoyl peroxide and the other containing an aromatic tertiary
amine accelerator. They are formulated to cure very slowly when
mixed for the self-cured mechanism. The curing process is then
accelerated on “command” via light curing. The chief advantage of
this system is assurance of completion of cure throughout, even if
light curing is inadequate. The major disadvantage is the porosity
caused by the required mixing, but this has been greatly alleviated by the use of mixing syringes. There is also less color stability
than with the light-cured resins as a result of the aromatic amine
accelerators, but this is still better than the self-cured systems
because the concentration of the accelerators is reduced compared
with self-cured resins. Finally, as with the self-cured resins, oxygen inhibition and porosity are problems with dual-cured resins.
Dual-cured materials are intended for any situation that does not
allow sufficient light penetration to produce adequate monomer
conversion—for example, cementation of bulky ceramic inlays.
This technology has been incorporated into direct composites to
develop bulk-fill composites with unlimited depth of cure. Examples include Parkell HyperFil, Apex Injectafil DC, and Coltene
Fill-Up!.

Classification by Filler Particle Size
The classification of fillers by particle size is shown in Table 5-2.
In conjunction with the chronology of dental composite developments shown in Figure 5-1, it can be seen that the distribution and
average size of filler particles played a major role in the advancement of dental composites. As such, a classification of dental composites based on the filler particle size can be used (Table 5-1).

CHAPTER 5

Traditional/Large-Particle/Macrofill Composites
These are the traditional composites with glass or silica macrofiller
particles in the size range of between 8 to 40 μm (Figure 5-6).
Because of their large particle size, these composites have lower
relative viscosity and are easier to fill at higher loadings than
microfills and nanofills. As such, they tend to be stronger and can
be used in high-stress areas. However, the visibly rough texture
after polishing, caused by the exposure of larger particles, has
made this category of dental composite obsolete.

Resin-Based Composites

97

Class of Filler

Particle Size

Macrofillers

10–100 μm

Midfillers

1–10 μm

Small/fine fillers

0.1–10 μm

Minifillers

0.1–1 μm

Homogeneous Microfill Composites
The solution to rough surfaces and an opaque appearance was
the homogeneous microfill composites, which used filler particles
with a mean diameter much smaller than the wavelength of visible
light. Such fillers are made by a pyrolytic precipitation process
where a silicon compound such as SiCl4 is burned in an oxygen/
hydrogen atmosphere to form macromolecular chains of colloidal
silica (see Figure 5-7), resulting in amorphous silica with an average
size of 40 nm.
However, these particles, because of their extremely small size,
have extremely large surface areas ranging from 50 to 400 m2/g. In
addition, the pyrolytic process results in particle “agglomeration”
into long, molecular-scale chains (Figures 5-8 and 5-9). These
nondiscrete, 3-D, chainlike networks drastically increase monomer viscosity and make clinical manipulation difficult. Thus filler
incorporation at high enough loading to adequately reinforce the
resin is difficult. In fact, when incorporated directly in “homogeneous” microfill composites, only about 2% by weight produces a
stiff paste that is much too viscous for clinical manipulation
(Figure 5-10). They are often just called microfill composite.

Microfillers

0.01–0.1 μm (agglomerated)

CRITICAL QUESTIONS

Nanofillers

0.005–0.1 μm*

Why is the polymerization shrinkage of microfilled (heterogeneous microfill)
composites not higher than that of conventional composites even though the
inorganic filler loading in microfill is substantially lower?

TABLE 5-2

Classification of Reinforcing Filler
Particles by Size Range

*5–100 nm, nonagglomerated.

Microfilled (Heterogeneous Microfill) Composites
To increase the inorganic filler loading of microfill composites, a
resin-based filler loaded with 10- to 100-nm inorganic colloidal
silica is used instead. These resin-based, heterogeneous fillers are
made by incorporating about 50 vol% of silane-treated colloidal
silica microfiller into the monomer at a slightly elevated temperature to lower the viscosity and by using large industrial machines
capable of mixing high-viscosity blends. The mixture is cured, and
then pulverized to make a filled resin powder consisting of 5- to
50-μm particles. These amorphous colloidal silica-containing particles are then used as an “organic” filler, which is incorporated into
the monomer with additional silane-treated colloidal silica to form
a workable paste. In this way, the overall inorganic filler content of
the final, cured composite is increased to about 50% by weight.
However, if the composite particles are counted as filler particles,
the filler content is closer to 80% by weight (approximately 60%
by volume). A diagram representing the preparation of the filler in
microfilled resins of this type is shown in Figure 5-11. This class of
material is called heterogeneous microfill or microfilled composite.
• Figure 5-6 Ground quartz filler particles with diameters of about
1 to 30 μm. Such relatively large fillers were used in early formulations
of traditional composites. The smaller particles seen in the background
contribute to a broad particle-size distribution. (Courtesy Dr. Karl-Johan
Söderholm.)

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Which properties of microfilled resins are generally inferior to those of other
resin-based composite materials, and what are the clinical implications of
these deficiencies?

Heat

• Figure 5-7 Pyrogenic reaction showing the initial formation of fumed silica particles in the 40-nm size
range, as used in microfill resins. (Courtesy Dr. Karl-Johan Söderholm.)

98

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

100

Viscosity/kPa.s

10

Close-packed
spheres limit
1

Large glass beads
Small glass beads
Powdered quartz
0.1
0.1

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Volume fraction filler

• Figure 5-8 Transmission electron microscope image of fumed silica particles produced by the pyrogenic reaction shown in Figure 5-7. The particle diameters average approximately 40 nm. (Courtesy Dr. Karl-Johan Söderholm.)

• Figure 5-10 The effect of filler specific surface area on the viscosity
(log scale) of the uncured resin matrix. The smaller the particle, the larger
is the surface area and the greater the viscosity buildup. (Adapted from
Darvell BW: Materials Science for Dentistry, ed 10, Cambridge, UK, 2018,
Woodhead Publishing Ltd.)

Cure

+ Liquid
monomer

Powder

SiO2 particles
(~0.04 microns)

Pulverize

Solid resin

Resin filler particles
(5-50 microns)

• Figure 5-9 The pyrogenic silica used in microfill composites has a very
large total surface area because of its extremely small average particle
size of about 0.04 μm/40 nm. These particles agglomerate and form
long chains, as seen in this transmission electron micrograph. (Courtesy
Dr. Karl-Johan Söderholm.)

Whereas microfilled composites are among the more highly
polishable restorative composites, their physical and mechanical properties are generally inferior to those of traditional composites. This is to be expected because 40% to 80% by volume
of the restorative material is made up of resin, resulting in

• Figure 5-11 Preparation of resin filler particles for use in microfilled composites. The filler particles in a microfilled composite consist of pulverized
“composite filler particles” dispersed in a cured resin matrix. Pyrogenic colloidal silica particles of about 0.04 μm (about 40 nm) are incorporated into
both the precured resin filler particles and the curable monomer, with the
precured resin containing a substantially higher concentration. (Modified from
Lambrechts P: Basic Properties of Dental Composites and Their Impact on
Clinical Performance. Thesis. Leuven, Belgium, Katholieke University, 1983.)

greater water sorption, a higher coefficient of thermal expansion, and decreased elastic modulus. In addition, the weak
bond of the prepolymerized particles to the clinically cured
resin matrix results in decreased tensile strength, similar to that
of composites with nonsilanized filler particles. Table 5-3
shows various properties of different types of composites for
reference.

CHAPTER 5

TABLE 5-3

99

Resin-Based Composites

Properties of Composite Restorative Materials

Characteristic/
Property

Unfilled
Acrylic

Traditional

Hybrid (Small
Particle)

Hybrid (AllPurpose)

Microfilled

Flowable
Hybrid

Packable
Hybrid

Enamel

Dentin

Size (μm)

—

8–12

0.5–3

0.4–1.0

0.04–0.4

0.6–1.0

Fibrous

—

—

Inorganic filler
(vol%)

0

60–70

65–77

60–65

20–59

30–55

48–67

Inorganic filler
(wt%)

0

70–80

80–90

75–80

35–67

40–60

65–81

—

—

Compressive
strength (MPa)

70

250–300

350–400

300–350

250–350

—

—

384

297

Tensile strength
(MPa)

24

50–65

75–90

40–50

30–50

—

40–45

10

52

Elastic modulus
(GPa)

2.4

8–15

15–20

11–15

3–6

4–8

3–13

84

18

Thermal expansion
coefficient (ppm/°C)

92.8

25–35

19–26

30–40

50–60

—

—

—

—

Water sorption
(mg/cm2)

1.7

0.5–0.7

0.5–0.6

0.5–0.7

1.4–1.7

—

—

—

—

Knoop hardness
(KHN)

15

55

50–60

50–60

25–35

—

—

350–430

68

Curing shrinkage
(vol%)

8–10

—

2–3

2–3

2–3

3–5

2–3

—

—

Radiopacity (mm
of Al)

0.1

2–3

2–3

2–4

0.5–2

1–4

2–3

2

1

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What features of microfilled resins make them the material of choice for
certain types of restorations?
Which types of restorations are produced ideally from microfilled composites?

In the longer term, if microfilled composites are placed in wearprone areas, they eventually break down and wear at a rate too fast
for acceptable clinical performance. If placed in areas of proximal
contact, anterior tooth “drifting” may occur. The wear process
has also been related to fracture propagation around the poorly
bonded “organic” filler particles (Figure 5-12). Thus diamond
burs, rather than fluted tungsten-carbide burs, are recommended
for trimming microfilled composites so as to minimize the risk
of chipping. Microfilled composites are the resins of choice for
restoring teeth with carious lesions in smooth surfaces (classes III
and V) but not in stress-bearing situations (classes II and IV).

Nanofill Composites/Nanocomposites
More recently, nanoparticles (1 to 100 nm) have been fabricated
by a different method from the pyrolytic precipitation process used
for colloidal silica. This allows the individual, primary particles to
be surface-coated (with γ-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane, for
example) prior to becoming incorporated into 3-D macromolecule
chains, thereby preventing or limiting particle agglomeration into
large networks and driving up viscosity. In essence, the particle size
is similar to that in homogeneous microfill composites, but the difference is that the particles in homogeneous microfill composites
are in three-dimensional agglomerates or networks that increase

• Figure 5-12 Fractured microfilled composite. The fractured surface
shows that the organic filler (composite filler) particles have been plucked
out of the matrix resin, suggesting adhesive failure resulting from a weak
interface between the precured microfill particles and the resin matrix.
(Courtesy Dr. Karl-Johan Söderholm.)

viscosity, whereas those in nanofill composites are mostly discrete
and have a minimal effect on viscosity. Thus these composites have
optical properties and superior polishability like those of homogeneous microfill composites, but the surface treatment lowers the
increase in viscosity when incorporated into the monomer, which

100

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

allows an increased filler loading of upward of 60% by volume and
78% by weight. Filler loading in this range is expected to lead to the
necessary mechanical properties for use in posterior, stress-bearing
restorations, but these properties have not yet been confirmed.
One of the reasons that increased mechanical properties are
not observed is that no commercial products have as yet been
reported to contain only isolated, discrete, homogeneously dispersed nanoparticles as the sole filler component. In fact, few if
any dental resins currently designated as nanocomposites meet
the strict requirement of having essentially all filler particles of
less than 100 nm. This is because some of the nanoparticles exist
as loosely bound “clusters” (loose agglomerates, such as in Filtek
Supreme, 3M ESPE) of primary nanoparticles, which are sometimes reported to extend into the micron size range (e.g., 60 nm to
1.4 μm). Above 100 nm, clusters, like any particles, begin to scatter
visible light and thereby reduce the translucency and the depth of
cure of the composite. In addition, these clusters are not chemically
bound to each other and act to decrease mechanical properties.
Thus, although these nanocomposites with clusters have increased
filler loading and hence better mechanical properties than a true
homogeneous nanocomposite, they are not as strong as a hybrid
composite.
To combat this deficiency, larger particles of either finely
ground glass or prepolymerized nanoparticle-filled resin organic
filler particles (essentially the same as those found in the microfilled composites) are combined with the monomer-dispersed
nanoparticles. Thus most, if not all, of these products are more
accurately designated as “hybrid” nanocomposites or nanohybrids,
consisting of a blend of two or more size ranges of filler particles,
one or more of which is in the nanoparticle range (Table 5-1).

CRITICAL QUESTION

• Figure 5-13 A class IV restoration made with a hybrid composite. A,

What are the relationships and tradeoffs among particle size, composition,
and percentage of filler relative to their effect on the manipulation
consistency, polishability, radiopacity, durability, and appearance of resinbased composite materials?

Fractured maxillary central incisor prior to restoration. B, After restoration
with a hybrid composite. (Courtesy Dr. William Rose.)

Hybrid (Large-Particle, Midfiller, Minifiller, Nanohybrid)
Composites
As the name implies, hybrid composites are formulated with mixed
filler systems containing large-particle, midfiller, minifiller, microfine, and/or nanofiller particles in an effort to obtain even better
surface smoothness than that provided by the small-particle composites, while still maintaining the desirable mechanical properties
of the small-particle composites. Thus they are a general utility class
of composite that are also suitable for restoring certain high-stress
sites where esthetic considerations dominate—for example, incisal
edges and small noncontact occlusal cavities. They are widely used
for anterior restorations, including class IV sites (Figure 5-13). Most
commercial hybrid composites are marketed as nanohybrids because
they are supposed to contain discrete nanofillers, but whether that is
true or not, any hybrid could be marketed as a nanohybrid because
hybrids contain nanoparticles. Thus checking whether the nanoparticles are discrete in aggregates or in clusters is important.
Most modern hybrid fillers consist of colloidal silica and
ground particles of glasses containing heavy metals constituting
a filler content of approximately 75% to 80% by weight. The
glasses have an average particle size of about 0.4 to 1.0 μm, with
a trend to steadily reduce this size range as improvements are
made. In a typical size distribution, 75% of the ground particles
are smaller than 1.0 μm, and colloidal silica represents 10% to

20% by weight of the total filler content. The smaller microfiller
sizes increase the surface area, which generally increases the viscosity and requires a decrease in overall filler loading compared
with small-particle composites. A polished surface is shown in
Figure 5-14.

Classification of Composites by Manipulation
Characteristics
There are three distinct classes of composite materials based on the
flow characteristics of the composite materials during the placement: flowable, condensable, and bulk fill.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the key modifications in formulation to make composites flowable?

Flowable/Injectable Composites
A modification of available composites resulted in the so-called
flowable or injectable composites, which have become popular
since 1995. These resins typically have a lower viscosity through a
reduced filler loading, which enables the resin to flow readily,
spread uniformly, intimately adapt to a cavity form, and produce
the desired dental anatomy. This improves the clinician’s ability to
form a well-adapted cavity base or liner, especially in class II

CHAPTER 5

• Figure 5-14 Polished surface of a hybrid composite similar to those
shown in Figures 5-12 and 5-14. Particle sizes range from about 0.1
to 3 μm (scanning electron microscope [SEM] magnification ×5000).
(Courtesy Dr. Robert L. Erickson.)

posterior preparations and other situations in which access is difficult. However, they are inherently inferior in mechanical properties because of the lower filler loading and higher susceptibility to
wear and other forms of attrition. Because of their greater ease of
adaptation and flexibility as a cured material, flowable composites
are also useful in class V restorations in gingival areas and as the
first base layer below a filling. They may also be applied in a manner similar to the use of fissure sealants as minimal class I restorations to prevent caries. Because they can flow into small crevice
defects along restoration margins, some dentists refer to flowable
resins as “dental caulk.”

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the key modifications in formulation to make composites packable?

Condensable/Packable Composites
Compared with amalgam, the technique of composite placement
is far more time-consuming and demanding. Because of their
highly plastic, paste-like consistency in the precured state, composites cannot be packed vertically into a cavity in such a way that
the material flows laterally and vertically to ensure intimate contact with the cavity walls. In particular, in the restoration of a tooth
in which proximal contact with the adjacent tooth is required, the
paste consistency of most composites dictates that a matrix band
be carefully contoured and wedged to obtain acceptable proximal
contact. These are tedious, time-consuming procedures and can
produce variable results without a high level of skill. Thus condensable composites (also known as packable composites) were developed
by adjusting their filler distribution to increase the filler loading
and, hence, the strength and stiffness of the uncured material, and
provide consistency and handling characteristics similar to those
of lathe-cut amalgam. Note that the term condensable is misleading because unlike amalgam, where the material is condensed to
“squeeze” out mercury to pack the amalgam alloy particles better
and produce stronger restoration, the filler particles in composites
are not packed more, and the resin is not “squeezed” out. Thus
packable is a more accurate term for this type of composite.
In addition, the packable characteristics are derived from the
inclusion of elongated, fibrous filler particles of about 100 μm in

Resin-Based Composites

101

length and/or rough-textured surfaces or branched geometries that
tend to interlock and resist flow. This causes the uncured resin to
be firm and resistant to slumping yet moldable under the force of
condensers (“pluggers”). In certain products, larger-than-average
filler particles (15 to 80 μm) are used, and the resin matrix is modified chemically to allow a slight increase in filler content over
hybrids. Some have the same filler particles as their companion
hybrids from the same manufacturer; the only difference is that
the resin matrix is adjusted to allow approximately 1% to 2% of
additional filler loading. However, many of the limitations of resin
composites still prevail, and approximately twice the time required
for amalgam placement is needed. At present, these materials have
not demonstrated any advantageous properties or characteristics
over the hybrid composites other than being somewhat similar to
amalgam in their placement technique. Despite manufacturers’
claims to the contrary, conventional packable composites have not
yet proven to be an answer to the general need for wear-resistant,
easily placed posterior resins with low curing shrinkage and a
depth of cure greater than 2 mm. A clinical study by van Dijkn
and Sunnegårdh-Grönberg reported that 6-year survival rates of
two packable composites, Nulite F (Nulite Systems International)
and Alert (Pentron), were 75% and 87%, respectively, and that the
incorporation of fibers create very rough surface characteristics.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the key modifications in formulation to make composites bulkcurable?

Bulk-Fill Composites
Two main disadvantages of light-cured composites are the need
of placing in 2-mm increments and the marginal gap formation
resulting from polymerization shrinkage stress. Although 2-mm
buildup reduces polymerization shrinkage stresses, this is very
time-consuming for the clinician.
To address these shortcomings, bulk-fill composites that have a
minimum of 4-mm depth of cure were introduced. This advancement has been made possible via the use of a combination of lowshrinkage monomers and greater translucency of the composite
by better matching of refractive indices between the filler and
resin. Other advancements include additional photoinitiators to
enhance light curing (Ivoclar Vivadent EvoCeram Bulk Fill with
Ivoceran) and/or the use of dual-cured initiator systems that allow
for unlimited depth of cure (Parkell HyperFil, Apex Injectafil DC,
and Coltene Fill-Up!).
Bulk-fill composites typically have good mechanical properties
within the range of universal composites (transverse strength ∼120
to 160 MPa and elastic modulus ∼10 GPa), with very low shrinkage (<2% volumetrically). One study reported that despite being
placed in a 4-mm layer, SDR Flow (Dentsply) performed just as
well clinically as a nanohybrid placed in 2-mm layers after 5 years.
Because of the use of an amine-based activator, dual-cured
bulk-fill composites are expected to have poorer initial color and
color stability. Also, some studies have shown that only a few bulkfill composites had volumetric shrinkages <2%, and that shrinkages may be more in the range between 1.7% and 3.5%. Finally,
volumetric shrinkages are not well correlated to the production of
shrinkage stress because shrinkage stress is not a material property,
and various factors, such as rate of polymerization and composite
modulus, affect shrinkage stress. In fact, the method of shrinkagestress measurement strongly affects the measured stress values and
sometimes, even sample ranking. Thus, although shrinkage stress

102

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

may be more important than volumetric shrinkage in predicting
composite longevity, using this parameter to compare products is
more difficult, and relative rankings would need to be used instead.
Bulk-fill composites may be too translucent to be esthetic. To
address this concern, monomers that change in refractive index as
they polymerize have been used so that this will match with the
filler’s refractive index before curing to allow deep light penetration. However, as the cure progresses, the composite will become
opaquer and achieve a better match with the surrounding tooth
structure. Examples include 3M Filtek One Bulk Fill Smart Contrast Ratio Management system and Ivoclar Tetric EvoCeram Bulk
Fill Aessencio Technology.
The most recent advancement in bulk-fill composites is the
introduction of bulk-fill flowable composites. Most of these products are recommended as the first layer of a restoration like conventional flowable composites, except this time, the first layer
could be 4 mm (e.g., 3M Bulk Fill Flowable and Ivoclar Vivadent
EvoFlow Bulk Fill). Thus only a second top esthetic layer is needed
to complete the restoration, and often the corresponding bulk-fill
composites from the same company are recommended with these
bulk-fill flowables. The methods in making these bulk-curable are
similar to those in regular bulk-fill composites, except the filler
loading tends to be significantly lower to decrease viscosity (64 to
73 wt% vs. 77 to 87 wt% in conventional bulk-fill composites),
and thixotropic properties are used to make these composites
injectable. Despite that, transverse strengths are still in the range
of regular bulk-fill composites (120 to 173 MPa), but the elastic
modulus is lower, with some products having a deliberately lower
modulus to reduce polymerization shrinkage stress (1.1 to 2.1 MPa)
despite having higher volumetric shrinkage (2.5% to 3.5%).
Examples include 3M Bulk Fill Flowable and Shofu Beautifil Bulk
Flowable. A lower elastic modulus means the material is not as
stiff, and hence, some polymerization stress is relieved.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What is the strategy of formulation that allows universal composites to be
used in class I through V restorations?

Classification of Composites by Clinical Use
Filler particle size has predominantly determined the clinical use
of the composite. In general, composites with smaller particles
were used as anterior restorations because of their increased aesthetics but not in posterior applications because of their weaker
mechanical properties, and the opposite was true for composites
with larger particle sizes with higher filler loadings. However, the
advent of hybrid composites makes formulations of universal
composite applicable in all five classes of restorations. There are
now universal, universal flowable, and universal bulk-fill composites. There is currently not enough information to meaningfully
discuss universal bulk-fill composites except that an example is
the GC America G-aenial BULK Injectable, so this topic is not
included in this chapter.
The vast majority of new universal composites are nanohybrids
with good combinations of high filler loading, mechanical properties, and esthetics. Exceptions include the 3M Filtek Supreme
Ultra and Kerr Premise, which are nanofills. However, Filtek
Supreme Ultra contains nanoclusters that are in the micron-size
range, and Premise contains prepolymerized fillers (PPFs) similar
to nanohybrids. Universal composites are typically highly filled
(75% to 89% fill by weight and up to 70% by volume) to impart

very good mechanical properties with transverse strengths between
100 and 170 MPa and a modulus between 7 and 11 GPa. The
nanoparticles help enhance esthetics to allow for anterior placement. In addition, many products (e.g., Kerr Premise, Dentsply
Sirona TPH Spectra ST, GC America Kalore, and Ivoclar Tetric
EvoCeram) contain larger PPFs that not only allow for increased
filler loading but also allow for greater polishability because the
PPFs are polymer based. Several products have also modified fillers and their refractive indices to produce a chameleon effect (e.g.,
GC America Gradia Direct X and Kalore, and Kerr Harmonize
and Herculite Ultra) to enhance the ease of color matching.
The universal flowable category is misleading because many are
for cavity base linings for the corresponding universal composite
or only for class V restorations. As such, they are not universal
composites. Those truly universal flowable composites have flexural strengths, moduli, wear, and esthetic properties in the range
of universal composites, and their flowability is produced through
the system’s thixotropic properties, which allow these composites
to flow under pressure and be injected but become more elastic and prevent slumping. Hence, some products may be called
“injectable” rather than “flowable.” Their flow properties are in
the low-flow range of flowable composites. Again, most of these
products are nanohybrids, except GC America’s G-Aenial Universal Flo and G-Aenial Universal Injectable, which are nanofills with
modified silanation to increase filler loading (69% by weight and
50% by volume) and the bond between the resin and filler to
increase mechanical properties. Other examples of universal flowable composites include Shofu Beautifil Flow Plus X and VOCO
GrandioSo Flow and Heavy Flow.

Classification of Composites by Unique
Properties
As composites have become the dominant materials in restorative
dentistry, they have also been formulated to address additional
demands from the material. The unique properties discussed in
this section include low-shrinkage composites, self-adhesive flowable composites, and bioactive composites.

Low-Shrinkage Composites
With polymerization shrinkage being a major deficiency with dental composites, there have been many advancements to develop
low-shrinkage composites. These advancements can be separated
into advancements that maximize filler loading and those in lowshrinkage monomers.
Maximizing Filler Loading

The role of fillers in reducing polymerization shrinkage has been
discussed earlier. The first dental composite marketed as a lowshrinkage composite was the Bisco Aelite LS with optimized filler
loading as high as 89% by weight and 75% by volume, which is
still the highest filler loading by volume reported. The Aelite LS
has a filler particle size range of 0.04 to 3.5 μm and a volumetric
shrinkage of 1.5%, but because of the larger particles, this material
is only recommended for posterior class I, II, and VI restorations
and not for aesthetic applications.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the key strategies used in the new monomers to make composites
low shrinkage?

O
O

O

O
O

O
m

H
N

O

H
N

O
N
H

O

H
N

O

103

Resin-Based Composites

CHAPTER 5

O
O

O

O
m

n

O
O

• Figure 5-15 A high-molecular-weight polyurethane dimethacrylate monomer, DX-511, that contains a
long, rigid central section between flexible methacrylate end groups (Kalore, GC America, Alsip, IL). Like
urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA), DX-511 has urethane (–NH–CO–O–) groups that connect a central segment between two ethylmethacrylate end groups. It also contains 2m + 1 cyclohexane rings. (Courtesy
Dr. Barry K. Norling.)

The Shofu Beautifil Bulk Restorative similarly has a filler loading as high as 87% by weight and 75% by volume and a volumetric shrinkage of 1.7%. This material is also only indicated
for posterior, nonaesthetic class I and II applications. Interestingly, the Shofu Beautifil II LS has lower filler loading at 83%
by weight but lower volumetric shrinkage at 0.85%, yet higher
shrinkage stress than the Beautifil Bulk Restorative (2.72 MPa
vs. 1.06 MPa, respectively). This surprising difference in shrinkage stress is caused by Beautifil Bulk Restorative having a lower
elastic modulus.
Low-Shrinkage Monomers

The influence of monomers on polymerization shrinkage has also
been discussed earlier. In this section, we will discuss four monomers that have been used to formulate low-shrinkage composites.
Kalore, also known as DX-511 (GC America) (Figure 5-15),
has a high molecular weight and a long rigid central section with
flexible methacrylate end groups; these provide rodlike shapes
that facilitate self-assembly into compact molecular structures.
This, together with dilution of the number of polymerizable end
groups as a result of the high molecular weight (895 vs. 512 for
bis-GMA), reduces polymerization shrinkage, and the flexible
end groups promote reactivity and enhance monomer–polymer
conversion.
N’Durance (Septodont USA) is a dimer dicarbamate dimethacrylate (DDCDMA) product that also contains a bulky central
group, somewhat analogous to TDC-urethane dimethacrylate.
The bulky center is made up of a six-carbon aliphatic ring with
two long hydrocarbon side chains derived from a linoleic acid
dimer (Figure 5-16). The center section is connected to two
methacrylate end groups via urethane groups (−NH−CO−O−,
also referred to as carbamate groups). The chain length between
reactive ends is very long (having a molecular weight of 843),
similar to that of DX-511 (see Figure 5-15), which provides double-bond dilution and hence reduced shrinkage; the bulky center
section allows greater conversion during copolymerization and
greater stress relaxation prior to the gel point. A further advantage
is the hydrophobic nature of the center group, which restricts
water absorption and solubility with the other dimethacrylates
in the formulation. This leads to the formation of two separate
phases during polymerization and produces a small expansion
that partially offsets the polymerization shrinkage.
Venus Diamond (Kulzer) is a resin product based on
4,8-di(methacryloxy methylene)-tricyclodecane (TCDDMA), a
bulky, space-filling dimethacrylate monomer (Figure 5-17). The
bulky three-ring central group provides steric hindrance, which
holds the monomers apart and thus slows the rate of polymerization. This lengthens the time needed for the crosslinking
reaction to reach the gel point and provides time for adjacent

O

O
TCDDMA
O

O

• Figure 5-16 4,8-Di(methacryloxymethylene)-tricyclodecane (TCDDMA),
a bulky, space-filling urethane dimethacrylate monomer.
polymer chain segments to slip among themselves, rearrange to
lower-energy configurations, and relieve developing stresses before
the gel point is reached, resulting in one of the lower-curing-stress
resins currently reported among commercial products.
Filtek LS (3M ESPE) involves an entirely different chemistry
based on epoxy, rather than acrylic functionality. This product is
no longer available on the market but is included here in case
future products contain epoxy chemistry. These tetra-functional
“silorane” monomers (Figure 5-18) use ring-opening polymerization. Silorane chemistry uses a combination of epoxy functionality
(three-unit ring with two carbons and one oxygen) combined with
siloxane units (–O−Si−O–) that can be cured with low shrinkage
via a cationic crosslinking mechanism by means of ring-opening
polymerization. When the rings open, they lengthen and occupy
more space; the resulting expansion offsets a substantial proportion of the polymerization shrinkage. Previously, epoxy systems
were not used for dental applications because a nontoxic curing
initiator with hydrolytic stability could not be found.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What technology is employed to make composites self-adhesive?

Self-Adhesive Flowable Composites
The process of bonding composites to the tooth is complicated. As such, the development of dentin bonding agents has
gone from “three step” to “one step” with one bottle of liquid.
Self-adhesive flowable composites, which contain self-etching
and adhesive monomers for bonding to hydroxyapatite, may
practically eliminate the bottles and the use of a separate bonding
agent. These composites would be used like conventional flowable composites in small class I cavities, as a first or base layer
under fillings, and as pit and fissure sealants, but without the
need for a bonding agent.
Currently, three commercial self-adhesive flowable composites exist, each containing a monomer that etches and adheres
to tooth structure. DMG Constic contains 10-methacryloyloxydecyl dihydrogen phosphate (MDP) monomer, which was
found to form stable bonds with hydroxyapatite with the formation of 10-MDP-Ca salts. Kerr Vertise Flow contains glycerol phosphate dimethacrylate (GPDM) monomers, which have

104

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

O

O

O

O
N
H

O
O

N
H

O
O

• Figure 5-17 Dimer dicarbamate dimethacrylate (DDCDMA), a phase-separating cycloaliphatic urethane
dimethacrylate with a bulky center, is composed of a six-carbon aliphatic ring with two long hydrocarbon
side chains derived from a linoleic acid dimer. (Courtesy Dr. Barry K. Norling.)
O

O
O Si
Si

O

O

Si
Si O

O
O

• Figure 5-18 Tetrafunctional silorane monomer polymerizes via a cationic-initiated, epoxy-ring–opening, crosslinking mechanism. When the rings
open, the chains lengthen and occupy more space and partially offset the
polymerization shrinkage. (Adapted from Weinmann W, et al: Siloranes in
dental composites. Dent Mater 21:68–74, 2005.)

a strong etching effect but form a weaker chemical bond with
hydroxyapatite compared with other self-adhesive monomers.
Pentron Fusio Liquid Dentin uses 4-methacryloxyethyl trimetellitic acid (4-META) to etch and bond via its carboxylate groups
to the calcium in hydroxyapatite.
Product brochures show dentin shear bond strengths of 24, 20,
and 15 MPa for Constic, Vertise Flow, and Fusio Liquid Dentin,
respectively. However, Peterson et al. reported that after thermocycling for 5000 cycles at temperatures of 5 to 55 °C, dentin bond
strengths deteriorated to 0.3, 0.7. and 2.4 MPa, and enamel bond
strengths deteriorated to 3.9, 1.4, and 2.5 MPa for Constic, Vertise Flow, and Fusio Liquid Dentin, respectively. The results are
suspected to be caused by the low filler loading of these flowables
and the hydrophilic nature of the self-etching and adhesive monomers, which may increase water imbibition and subsequent polymer degradation.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What is the main characteristic of a bioactive composite?
Which released ions are responsible for hydroxyapatite formation?

Bioactive Composites
The definition of a bioactive material in biomedical science is a
material that is not just biocompatible or bioinert but one that
produces a favorable biological response, such as repair or regeneration of tissue. In dental materials, bioactive materials have

traditionally included those that release fluoride ions, such as glass
ionomers, resin-modified glass ionomers (RMGIs), and compomers (Chapter 7, Glass ionomer Cement and Combination
Cements). Released F– ions can induce remineralization and bind
with apatite to form stronger fluorapatite to protect the tooth
from acid demineralization. However, glass ionomers and RMGIs
are not very aesthetic and have poor mechanical properties. As
such, they are mainly used as class V restorations and as cements.
New and improved bioactive composites include DMG’s
Ecosite Bulk Fill composite, Parkell’s Predicta Bioactive composites (Bulk, Core-Stackable, and Core-Flowable), Shofu’s Beautifil
composites (II LS, Bulk Flowable, Flow Plus, and Flow Plus X),
and Pulpdent’s ACTIVA BioACTIVE restorative. Interestingly,
DMG’s Ecosite Bulk Fill composite is not marketed as a bioactive composite, despite claims that this product releases F– ions.
Parkell’s Predicta Bioactive composites simply release Ca2+, PO4–,
and F− to trigger apatite formation. However, there is currently
not much information available for how Predicta Bioactive composites release these ions.
Shofu’s Beautifil composites are “hybrid” composites called
Giomer that are like RMGIs and compomers with modified
filler. The aim is to combine the fluoride-releasing and recharging ability of glass ionomers with the mechanical properties of
nanohybrid composites. The advancement here is that instead
of using alumino-silicate glass particles to release F− ions,
Giomers use fluoro-boro-alumino-silicate glass particles with a
surface coating of a glass ionomer trapped in a polyacid matrix
to also release Na+, Sr2+, Al3+, SiO4–, and BO3. The SiO4– and
F− ions are used to promote remineralization, and the F− and
Sr2+ ions are used for converting hydroxyapatite to the stronger
fluoro-apatite and strontium-apatite. The ion exchange from
Giomer fillers is also supposed to neutralize acid that leads to
tooth demineralization.
Pulpdent’s ACTIVA BioACTIVE restorative is a dual-cured
RMGI/compomer, which is based on urethane dimethacrylate that increases composite toughness and reduces wear compared with RMGIs and compomers. This composite releases and
recharges with Ca2+, PO4−, and F− to stimulate apatite formation
and teeth remineralization and releases more PO4– under acidic
conditions to claim its “smart” material status. This product is also
self-adhesive as a result of the polyacrylic acid in the glass ionomer
component and phosphate-based monomers in the ionic resin
(Chapter 7, Zinc Polycarboxylate Cement and Glass Ionomer
Cement). The system is a dual-cured material that uses an automix
syringe that will entail some of the disadvantages inherent in dualcured composites. Its transverse strength is toward the lower end
of universal composites (120 MPa). However, a 2019 randomized controlled study by van Dijken et al. suggested that ACTIVA

CHAPTER 5

BioACTIVE, as used in posterior restorations, may not bond to
dentin or prevent secondary caries. The article cited a significantly
higher failure rate compared with a nonbioactive nanofill composite as soon as 1 year (24.1% vs. 2.5%, respectively) as a result of
lost restorations, postoperative symptoms, and secondary caries.

Properties of Resin-Based Composites
Table 5-3 presents a compilation of selected physical and mechanical properties of various types of composites. Additional properties
described in this section include degree of cure, resin matrix constrain, strengthening mechanism, curing shrinkage and shrinkage
stress, wear, clinical longevity, placement time, and biocompatibility.

Degree of Conversion
The DC is a measure of the percentage of carbon–carbon double
bonds that have been converted to become part of a polymeric
chain (Figure 5-19). The higher the DC, the better the strength,
wear resistance, and many other properties essential to resin performance. A conversion of 50% to 60%, typical of highly crosslinked bis-GMA–based composites, implies that 50% to 60% of

Unreacted, pendent
methacrylate double bond

Resin-Based Composites

105

the methacrylate groups have polymerized. This does not mean
that 40% to 50% of the monomers are left unpolymerized in the
resin. The most likely scenario is that one of the two methacrylate
groups per dimethacrylate molecule is covalently bonded to the
polymer, with the rest of the molecule forming a pendant group.
Conversion of the monomer to a polymer depends on the resin
composition; the irradiance of the light source; the light transmission through the material; and the concentrations of sensitizer,
initiator, and inhibitor. The total DC within resins does not differ between chemical-activated and light-activated composites
containing the same monomer formulations as long as adequate
light curing is employed. Conversion values of 50% to 70% are
achieved at room temperature for both curing modes. Likewise,
the polymerization shrinkage of comparable light-activated and
chemical-activated resins is not significantly different.

Matrix Constraint
When thermal expansion arises, the interfacial bond between
the resin matrix and the filler with a lower coefficient of thermal
expansion (nearly zero in some cases) prevents the resin matrix
from pulling away and, thus, reduces expansion of the matrix.

Unreacted
dimethacrylate
monomer

Fully reacted
dimethacrylate
crosslink

• Figure 5-19 The degree of conversion reflects the percentage of methacrylate double bonds that are
converted to single bonds during the curing reaction. This figure shows that a cured resin can contain
dimethacrylate groups with zero, one, or two unreacted double bonds. If at least one double bond has
reacted, the dimethacrylate group is bound to the polymer network as a “pendant” group with one double
bond available for further reaction. Any completely unreacted monomers can migrate out of the cured
resin. Crosslinked groups strengthen and make the resin rigid, whereas pendant groups plasticize the
resin, and unreacted monomer softens and swells the resin structure, as explained in Chapter 2, Thermal
Properties.

106

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Conversely, during cooling, the matrix contracts and decreases the
space occupied by the filler, but because the filler occupies that
space, full contraction is prevented or reduced.
This constraint does have limits. During expansion, the composite can fracture within the matrix because of the added tension
at the resin–filler interface, depending on whether the interfacial
bond is stronger than the fracture toughness of the filler or the
matrix. In contraction, the composite can fracture within the
matrix or within the filler particle, depending on which is weaker.

Weak
interface

A

Strengthening Mechanism
The strength of composites is highly dependent on the bonding
between the weak matrix and the strong filler particles. Without
the coupling agent, the filler particles cannot absorb stresses in the
matrix and act as if they were voids. Thus a crack traveling through
the matrix simply bypasses the particles. The energy required to
detour around noncoupled particles is lower because the lack of
coupling at the filler–matrix interface makes this interface behave
as an existing “crack.” In a true composite, as the crack propagates to a bonded filler particle, the crack must pass around the
particle because the filler particle is stronger than the matrix and
the interfacial bond. Thus the path the crack must take around
the particles has to be created, and the creation of the new path
requires additional energy. The additional energy needed must
come from the increase of the external stress acting on the composite. This makes the composite tougher.
If the interfacial bond is weaker than the matrix, a process of
crack blunting occurs (Figure 5-20). As the crack propagates to
the weak interface, a void or tear opens up in front of the advancing crack because of the stresses that the weak bond experiences.
However, this void is perpendicular to the propagating crack; thus
when the crack arrives, the tip of the crack has been blunted, and
more stress is required to propagate the crack.
Note that the use of a crosslinked polymer matrix also increases
toughness because the crosslinkage prevents the polymer chains
from being drawn and separated as the crack propagates. However, the material then becomes brittle.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the problems that result from shrinkage and curing-induced
marginal stress during the polymerization of restorative resins?
How are polymerization stresses affected by the presence of reinforcing
fillers in dental composites?

Cure Shrinkage and Managing Shrinkage Stress
Cure shrinkage arises as the monomer is converted to polymer
because the free space a polymer chain occupies is about 20% less
than that of a matching number of monomers. During the early
stage of the polymerization, the material is still soft, and that allows
the growing polymer chains to adjust their position to relieve the
stress they are under. When polymerization reaches the gelation or
the gel point, and the material begins to become rigid, the growing
chains will not be able to move as easily and thus become stressed as
polymerization progresses. The resultant polymerization stress can
be affected by the total volume of the composite material, the type
of composite, the polymerization rate, and the ratio of bonded/
nonbonded surfaces or the configuration of the tooth preparation
(C-factor). These stresses tend to develop at the tissue–composite
interface, stressing the bond, and eventually producing a gap at the

B

Secondary
crack initiated

C

Crack tip
blunting

• Figure 5-20 Crack propagation near weakly bonded interface. A, A crack
propagates toward a weak interface under the influence of a tensile stress.
B, A secondary crack initiated at the weak interface when the stress induced
at the interface is greater than the interfacial bond strength. C, When the
main crack reaches the secondary crack, its propagation is impeded by a
process called crack blunting. (Adapted from Darvell BW: Materials Science
for Dentistry, ed 10, Cambridge, UK, 2018, Woodhead Publishing Ltd.)

restoration margins. Consequently, the risk for marginal leakage
and the ensuing problems of marginal staining and secondary caries are exacerbated. Undoubtedly, this is one of the greatest problems of composites used for class II and V restorations.
As discussed previously, light-activated resins give the operator control of working time and eliminate porosity from mixing
the two-part systems of chemical-activated resins. However, the
internal pores in self-cured resins act to relax residual stresses that
build up during curing (the pores enlarge during hardening and
reduce the concentration of stresses at the margins). Also, the
slower curing rate of chemical activation allows a larger portion of
the shrinkage stress to relax by internal flow before the gel point.
Two general approaches have been followed in seeking to overcome the problem of stress concentration and marginal failure experienced with light-activated resins: reduction in volume contraction by
altering the chemistry and composition of the resin system and clinical techniques designed to offset the stresses caused by polymerization
shrinkage. Reduction in volume contraction has been achieved by
using larger monomers to “dilute” the number of double bonds that
need to be reacted and by the addition of fillers that reduce the quantity of resin needed in the composite. Some low-shrinkage monomers
are described earlier in the Low-Shrinkage Composites section. Clinical techniques involving incremental buildup and control of the curing rate are described in the following sections.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can the composite clinical manipulation technique be used to improve
the integrity of the marginal seal in a composite restoration?

CHAPTER 5

A

B

Resin-Based Composites

107

C

• Figure 5-21 Incremental buildup of the box. A, First incremental layer of resin composite (gray area)
has been placed and cured. B, Second increment being cured with a light source. C, Third composite
increment during curing.

Incremental Buildup and Cavity Configuration
One technique attempts to reduce the C-factor, which is related
to the geometry of the cavity preparation and represented by the
ratio of bonded to nonbonded surface areas. Residual polymerization stress increases directly with this ratio. During curing,
shrinkage leaves the bonded cavity surfaces in a state of stress; the
nonbonded, free surfaces (i.e., those that reproduce the original
external tooth anatomy) relax some of the stress by contracting
inward toward the bulk of the material. A layering technique
(Figure 5-21) in which the restoration is built up in increments,
curing one layer at a time, effectively reduces polymerization
stress by minimizing the C-factor. That is, thinner layers reduce
the bonded surface area and maximize the nonbonded surface
area, thus minimizing the associated C-factor. Thus an incremental technique overcomes both the limited depth of cure of most
light-cured composites and the residual stress concentration but
adds to the time and difficulty of placing a restoration.
Soft-Start, Ramped Curing, and Delayed Curing
Another approach that is used to offset light-activated polymerization stress buildup is to follow the example of chemically initiated
systems by providing an initial low rate of polymerization, thereby
extending the time available for stress relaxation before reaching the gel point. This can be accomplished by using a soft-start
technique, whereby curing begins at low light irradiance and finishes with high irradiance. This approach allows for a slow initial
rate of polymerization and a high initial level of stress relaxation
during the early stages and ends at the maximum irradiance once
the gel point has been reached. This drives the curing reaction to
the highest possible conversion only after much of the stress has
been relieved. A number of studies have demonstrated that varying levels of stress reduction in tooth-cavity walls can be achieved
in this way, while not increasing the total exposure time or sacrificing either degree of cure or depth of cure. Consequently, a
variety of protocols have been developed and the necessary lamps
made available that automatically provide one or more soft-start
exposure sequences.
Variations of this technique include ramping and delayed cure.
In ramping, the irradiance is gradually increased or “ramped up”
during the exposure. Such ramping employs stepwise, linear, or
exponential modes. In delayed curing, the restoration is initially

incompletely cured at low irradiance. The clinician then sculpts and
contours the resin to the correct occlusion and later applies a second
exposure of light for the final cure. This delay allows substantial
stress relaxation to take place. The longer the time that is available for relaxation, the lower is the residual stress that is expressed.
Delayed curing and exponential ramp curing appear to provide
greater reductions in curing stress but do require more time.
In response to this situation, care should be taken when highirradiance lamps are used. Increased lamp irradiance allows for
shorter exposure times for a given depth of cure in a particular shade
and type of resin. Thus these high-irradiance lamps should, in principle, provide substantial savings in chair time. However, a highirradiance, short-exposure time causes an accelerated rate of curing,
which inevitably leads to substantial residual stress buildup because
of the inherently less time for stress-relaxation mechanisms to take
place. Because of these tradeoffs, there appears to be little advantage to ramped, delayed, or soft-start curing techniques. Numerous
laboratory studies and some clinical evidence support this conclusion. Thus the clinician should carefully consider the tradeoffs
before investing in these more expensive types of curing lamps.

Wear
In addition to polymerization shrinkage, other frequent clinical
problems have been occlusal (Figure 5-22) and interproximal wear,
especially in the case of posterior composites. The mechanism of
occlusal wear is a complex problem that has been the subject of
much research. Unfortunately, before clinical use, abrasion and
wear resistance can be measured only by a laboratory test that simulates simplified environmental conditions. As of yet, no single test
method has been agreed upon as a valid predictor of clinical performance. Although several laboratory test methods are useful to guide
research and development efforts, controlled clinical evaluations are
the only reliable means of evaluating the durability and useful lifetime of restorative materials. However, based on such studies, the
best composites designed for posterior restorations still wear more
than natural enamel under identical conditions. Although wear-rate
differences of 10 to 20 μm/year may seem small for posterior composites, this wear rate still amounts to 0.1 to 0.2 mm more than
enamel over 10 years. Thus being cautious is important in selecting
the clinical cases to be treated with posterior composites.

108

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

• Figure 5-22 Scanning electron micrograph of a 9-year-old small-particle-filled composite, illustrating generalized wear surface by three-body
wear. (Courtesy Dr. Robert L. Erickson.)

Two principal mechanisms of composite wear have been proposed. The first mode is two-body wear, based on direct contact of
the restoration with an opposing cusp or with adjacent proximal
surfaces to mimic the high stresses developed in the small area of
contact. This is related to the higher force levels exerted by the
opposing cusp or forces transferred to proximal surfaces.
The second mode is three-body wear, which simulates the loss
of material in noncontact areas, most probably owing to contact
with food as this is forced across the occlusal surfaces. This type of
wear is affected in a complex way by a number of composite properties, such as toughness, porosity, stability of the silane coupling
agent, degree of monomer conversion, filler loading, and the sizes
and types of filler particles.
Clinically, although direct tooth-to-restoration contact occurs
infrequently during mastication, the loss of material caused
by direct wear in areas of tooth-to-tooth contact appears to be
greater than that of three-body abrasion by food in noncontact
areas. Composites in which the filler particles are small (1 μm or
less), high in concentration, and well bonded to the matrix are the
most resistant to wear. Large restorations tend to wear more than
smaller ones do, such as in restorations in molars compared with
those in premolars.
Variations among patients—such as differences in chewing
habits, force levels, and variations in oral environments—also play
a significant role in the wear process. A typical wear pattern for
a composite is shown in Figure 5-22 for a 9-year-old, chemicalactivated, small-particle–filled composite restoration. Although
the loss of material shown in this figure is more severe than that
for current restorative materials, the image illustrates the wear
phenomenon. Notice the smoother anatomical contours and the
exposed cavity walls where the composite has been worn away by
abrasion.
The major indications for class II composite restorations place
emphasis on the demand for esthetics. A conservative preparation
is preferred so that the tooth, rather than the composite, absorbs

more of the stress. The dentist must also be familiar with the rigorous placement procedures essential for success, as described
in textbooks on operative dentistry. However, there are obvious
contraindications. A composite class II restoration is doomed to
failure in the mouth of a patient who bruxes because of the greater
potential for wear. The use of posterior composites in a cariesactive mouth is also questionable because few current restorative
materials have the ability to provide an anticariogenic effect or to
resist leakage. If composites are used for such situations, the application of a hydrophilic sealing resin along the margins may be
beneficial. Nonetheless, with the greater demand for esthetics and
continual improvements in composite formulations, the use of
these materials in stress-bearing situations continues to increase.
In response, academic and industry research can be expected to
continue to improve the clinical durability of composite materials
(see later discussion of the longevity of composites).
The problem of wear in posterior resin applications has
been considerably reduced by ongoing advances in composite
technology. Nevertheless, difficulties still exist in high-stress situations related to inherent problems with both the mechanical
and chemical degradation of composites. However, polymerization shrinkage, technique sensitivity, and difficulty in obtaining
a predictable and reliable bond to dentin or cementum margins
are probably more important. These deficiencies remain a major
concern regarding the potential leakage associated with class II
restorations.

Longevity of Composites
The most commonly cited reasons for the failure of composites in
clinical studies are secondary caries, fracture, marginal deficiencies, and wear. However, these reasons vary greatly depending
on the type of study (randomized clinical trial versus privatepractice setting), type of composite used, period of observation,
and other aspects of study design. Nonetheless, when properly
placed, composites can last for many years even in posterior
regions, where wear and bite forces are greatest. The clinical performance of dental restorations is best judged on the basis of
long-term clinical trials, preferably those based on randomized
controlled designs. However, very few studies of this type exist
in the dental literature. We are using four studies to discuss the
longevity of composites.
A critical review of clinical data over 10 years by Chadwick
et al. shows that the survival rates of composites are significantly
lower than those of amalgam. Amalgam also demonstrated
less variability in survival rates (Figure 5-23). The comparative survival rates for amalgam versus composite restorations
in permanent teeth at 3, 4, 5, and 7 years are summarized in
Table 5-4. Similar comparative data for restorations in primary
teeth after 3 and 4 years are also listed in this table. The overall
survival rate for composites in permanent teeth after 7 years
was 67.4%, compared with 94.5% for amalgam restorations.
More than 90% of amalgam restorations in permanent teeth
survived longer than 9 years. In comparison, only 64% of glass
ionomer restorations survived after 5 years. Only 41% of class
V composites placed with dentin bonding agents survived longer than 5 years. The study concluded that the class II glass
ionomer/composite restorations should be avoided because
of a high percentage of failures at the gingival margin of the
proximal box.
In a retrospective study on the longevity of 1955 posterior composites placed between 1990 and 1997 in a private-practice setting,

CHAPTER 5

Resin-Based Composites

109

1.0
0.9

10-Year survival probability

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
Amalgam
Composite

0.1
0.0

212

216

269

405

396

460

414

765

460

811

501

854

765

858

801

864

854

Study number

• Figure 5-23 Ten-year survival probability for posterior composite and amalgam restorations. (Data from
Chadwick BL, Dummer PMH, Dunstan F, et al: The Longevity of Dental Restorations: A Systematic Review,
York, UK, 2001, National Health Service Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of York.)

TABLE 5-4

Comparison of Survival Probabilities for Various Types of Restorations after 3, 4, 5, and 7 Years
3 Years

4 Years

5 Years

7 Years

Primary Teeth

Permanent
Teeth

Primary Teeth

Permanent
Teeth

Primary Teeth

Permanent
Teeth

Primary Teeth

Permanent
Teeth

Amalgam

95.3

97.2

95.1

96.6

90.8

95.4

—

94.5

Composite

82.4

90.0

67.2

85.6

—

78.2

—

67.4

Glass ionomer

51.5

73.8

51.5

73.8

31.2

64.9

—

—

Class V composite
with DBA

—

83.7

—

47.7

—

41.5

—

—

Ceramic or
composite inlay

—

93.3

—

90.1

—

85.3

—

Restoration Type

DBA, dentin bonding agent.
Modified from Chadwick BL, Dummer PMH, Dunstan F, et al: The Longevity of Dental Restorations: A Systematic Review, York, UK, 2001, National Health Service Centre for Reviews and Disseminatioin,
University of York.

Opdam et al. reported a survival rate for composite resin of 91.7%
at 5 years and 82.2% at 10 years. There was a significant effect of
the size of restored surfaces on the survival of the restorations—
that is, the more conservative the restoration, the longer these
restorations survived.
In a 22-year follow-up of 362 restorations placed between
1986 and 1990, da Rosa Rodolpho et al. reported survival rates of
midfill hybrid composites at 74% and minifill hybrid composites
at 64%, respectively. The study also reported that the annual failure rate in the second part of the observation period had become
constant for midfill composites, whereas minifill composites had
shown an increase, suggesting that the physical properties of the
composite might have some impact on restoration longevity.

One systematic review by Alvanforoush and colleagues compared composite failure between the two decades of 1995 to 2005
and 2006 to 2016 using studies that were at least 24 months
long. Twelve studies that were used for the systematic review had
observation periods of posterior composites of longer than 6 years.
Five were published between 1995 and 2005 and observed posterior composites for 10 years. Seven were published between 2006
and 2016 that ranged from 6 to 22 years. Interestingly, overall,
they found that composite survival rates actually decreased from
89.4% in the studies from 1995 to 2005 to 86.9% in the studies from 2006 to 2016. However, the incidence of failure from
secondary caries decreased from 29.5% to 25.7%, and additionally, the incidence of composite fracture increased from 28.8% to

110

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

39.1%. The authors note that these findings may be attributable
to the increased use of composites for larger restorations. Table 5-5
summarizes long-term survival rates for the different types of composites in this review.

Placement Time of Composites
Although the performance of posterior composites has greatly
improved during the past decade relative to amalgams, the placement time is significantly longer for composites and much longer
for ceramic and composite inlays (Figure 5-24). Obviously, the cost
of restorations for the patient is also proportionately higher for the
inlay prostheses. In fact, the relative cost per tooth per year over a
5-year period in terms of multiples for amalgam is 1, composite is
1.62, and ceramic or composite inlay restorations is 6.35. The relative cost per tooth per year of amalgam restorations is significantly
less than that of composites after 10 years (1 vs. 3.36). A comparative analysis of the placement times is summarized in Table 5-6 for
class I, class II (two-surface), class II (three-surface, mesial-occlusaldistal), and pin-retained cusp replacement restorations.

Biocompatibility of Composites
A chemical insult to the pulp from composites is possible if components leach out or diffuse from the material and subsequently
reach the pulp. Inadequately cured composite materials at the floor
of a cavity can serve as a reservoir of diffusible components that
can induce long-term pulp inflammation. This situation is of particular concern for light-activated materials. If a clinician attempts
to polymerize too thick a layer of resin or if the exposure time to
the light is inadequate (as discussed previously), the uncured or
poorly cured material can release leachable constituents adjacent
to the pulp. Nonetheless, adequately polymerized composites are
relatively biocompatible because they exhibit minimal solubility,
and unreacted species are leached in very small quantities. From a
toxicological point of view, these amounts should be too small to
cause toxic reactions. However, from an immunological point of
view, under extremely rare conditions, some patients and dental
personnel can develop allergic responses to these materials.
The most noted biocompatibility issue related to composite
resin is the release of bisphenol A (BPA) from composites based

60

Long-Term Survival Rates of Different
Types of Composites

Composite Type

Study Term (Failure
Mechanism)

Fiber-reinforced packable

6y

75%–87%

Midfill

22 y

74%

Minifill

22 y

64%

Hybrid

10 y

80%

10 y (secondary caries)

40%

15 y (wear)

74%

18 y (fracture)

70%

Low shrinkage

15 y

77%

Universal nanohybrid

10 y

97%

Survival Rate

Adapted from Alvanforoush N, et al: Comparison between published clinical success of
direct resin composite restorations in vital posterior teeth in 1995–2005 and 2006–2016
periods. Aust Dent J 62(2):132–145, 2017.

TABLE 5-6

Class I

Class II

MOD

Cusp
coverage

50

Placement time (minutes)

TABLE 5-5

40

30

20

10

0
Amalgam

Composite

Inlay

• Figure 5-24 Placement time required for posterior amalgam, composite, and ceramic and composite inlay restorations. (Data from Chadwick
BL, Dummer PMH, Dunstan F, et al: The Longevity of Dental Restorations:
A Systematic Review, York, UK, 2001, National Health Service Centre for
Reviews and Dissemination, University of York.)

Comparison of Average Time (Minutes) Required for Initial (I) and Replacement (R) Restorations
AMALGAM

COMPOSITE

COMPOSITE AND CERAMIC INLAY

Restoration Type

I

R

I

R

I

R

Class I

11

11

15

16

34

34

Class II

15

13

24

24

41

40

MOD: mesio-occlusal-distal

19

19

29

31

45

45

Cusp replacement with pins

25

26

33

34

44

44

I, Initial restoration; R, replacement restoration.
Adapted from Chadwick BL, Dummer PMH, Dunstan F, et al: The Longevity of Dental Restorations: A Systematic Review, York, UK, 2001, National Health Service Centre for Reviews and Dissemination,
University of York.

CHAPTER 5

Resin-Based Composites

111

on bis-GMA. BPA, a precursor of bis-GMA and an impurity in
composite resin, has been shown to be a xenoestrogen, a synthetic
compound that mimics the effects of estrogen by having an affinity
for estrogen receptors. This estrogenicity of BPA was first reported
in a clinical study in 1996, where BPA was collected in saliva after
1 hour of sealant placement, with the conclusion that sealant application led to xenoestrogen exposure in children. This led to a deluge
of follow-up examinations to determine the validity of these results.
Studies have confirmed the release of BPA from composite resins, but the influence of BPA on the hormone balance is still in
question. Additional information on the biocompatibility of restorative materials and the effect of BPA is presented in Chapter 17,
Estrogenicity and Systemic Reactions.

finishing of composite restorations for up to 24 hours because
polymerization is incomplete at placement, although composite
manufacturers recommend that finishing be accomplished shortly
after placement. Studies have shown that delayed finishing can
actually increase marginal leakage and has no effect on surface
characteristics compared with immediate finishing. Also, delayed
finishing has a minimal effect on hardness. Thus for all practical purposes, almost all composite restorations should be finished
and polished shortly after placement during the same appointment, although the finishing should be delayed for approximately
15 min after curing.

Finishing and Polishing of Composites

A variety of materials and instruments can be used to finish and
polish composite restorations. The use of a scalpel blade or any
thin, sharp-edged instrument to remove flash on the proximal
areas is recommended. However, this is a very risky procedure,
especially if the trimming procedure involves shearing in a direction toward the composite and away from the gingival margin,
which can lead to localized debonding and leakage. Trimming
forces should be applied either parallel to the margin or toward
the gingival tissue. Coarse to ultrafine aluminum-oxide discs
can be applied to areas with difficult access around the proximal surfaces or in embrasures. Tungsten-carbide burs or fine
diamond tips can be used to adjust occlusal surfaces and blend
the composite to the surfaces of the teeth. Several studies in the
literature have rated many of these systems as to their effect on
surface smoothness and microleakage. Currently, aluminumoxide discs produce the best surface, while also inducing minimal
trauma. Other systems include resin-finishing instruments that
use fine and extrafine polishing pastes, silicone-based systems,
and silicon-carbide–impregnated polishing brushes and points.
Although high stresses may be associated with surface grinding
and polishing, a recent study has shown that the type of polishing system used does not significantly affect the development of
microleakage.

The term finishing usually refers to the process of adapting the
restorative material to the tooth (e.g., removing overhangs and
shaping occlusal surfaces that often leave behind irregular surfaces), whereas polishing refers to removing surface irregularities
to achieve the smoothest possible surface. Residual surface roughness can encourage bacterial growth, which can lead to a myriad
of problems, including secondary caries, gingival inflammation,
and surface staining. The best possible surface finish is produced
by placing a smooth matrix strip against composite resin during
polymerization. However, achieving proper contours and margin
adaptation is often difficult without some amount of finishing
because the plastic strip does not yield with the convex and concave features like the tooth surfaces.
The mechanisms of finishing and polishing are discussed in
Chapter 16, Mechanics of Abrasive Procedures, along with the
types of instruments used in dentistry. This segment will concentrate on the factors influencing the finish and polish of composite
restoration: (1) environment, (2) delayed versus immediate finish,
(3) the types of materials and instruments, and (4) postpolishing
procedures.

Environment
Some advocates say that finishing in a dry field with the finishing
equipment mounted on a slow-speed handpiece allows for better visualization of the restoration margins. However, studies have
shown that a dry polishing technique results in an increase in marginal leakage, possibly because of heat production. Other studies
have shown that structural and chemical changes occur on the surfaces of restorations as a result of a dry environment. In contrast,
still other research has reported that the dry-polishing technique
has no effect on the hardness or surface structure. As with many
dental procedures, grinding and finishing are best accomplished
in moderation. The clinician should finish the restoration in an
environment where the margins are clearly discernible and where
minimal heat is generated. Excessive heat results in smearing of
the surface and depolymerization. Water-cooling during grinding
and finishing should ensure a standard surface quality.

Elapsed Time Between Curing of the Composite
and Finishing and Polishing
The elapsed time between curing and finishing of the composite may also have an effect on surface characteristics and resistance to leakage that develop. Some advocate delaying the

Types of Materials and Instruments

Surface Coating and Sealing
An important step in finishing and polishing is the application
of a bonding agent or a surface sealer. There has been extensive
documentation that the finishing (and possibly polishing) process
is detrimental to composite surfaces in that surface microcracks
are introduced, and the highly polymerized outer surface of the
resin composite material is removed. Application of a penetrating surface sealer or a low-viscosity resin with little or no filler
ensures that surface porosities are filled and microcracks sealed.
Studies have shown that this “rebonding” technique also significantly decreases microleakage by improving the marginal seal of
restorations.

Repair of Composites
Composites can be repaired by replacing lost material. This is a
useful procedure for correcting defects or altering the contours
on existing restorations. The procedures for adding new material
differ depending on whether the restoration is freshly polymerized
or an older restoration.
When a restoration has just been placed and polymerized, this
restoration may still have an oxygen-inhibited layer of resin on
the surface. The addition of new composite can be made directly

112

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Flexure strength (MPa)

Composite Resin Veneers
3 months

6 months

50

A

C

B

D

Group

• Figure 5-25 The influence of the method of composite repair on
strength. Flexural strength after storage in distilled water at 37 °C for 3 and
6 months. A, Original, unbroken samples serving as a control. B, Repair
without first acid-etching. C, Repair after acid-etching and the application of an unfilled resin. D, Repair after toluene/silane treatment to soften
the broken surfaces and facilitate permeation by new monomer. (Adapted from Söderholm K-J: Flexure strength of repaired dental composites.
Scand J Dent Res 94:364–369, 1986.)
to this layer because this represents, in essence, an excellent
bonding substrate. Even after the restoration has been polished,
adding more material can still repair a defect. A restoration that
has just been cured and polished may still have about 50% of
unreacted methacrylate groups to copolymerize with the newly
added material.
As the restoration ages, fewer and fewer unreacted methacrylate groups remain, and greater crosslinking reduces the ability of
fresh monomer to penetrate the matrix. The strength of the bond
between the original material and the new resin decreases in direct
proportion to the time that has elapsed between polymerization
and the addition of the new resin. Furthermore, polished surfaces
expose filler surfaces that are free from silane. Thus the filler surface area does not chemically bond to the new composite layer.
Even ideally—that is, with the addition of a silane-bonding agent
to the surface before the addition of new composite—the strength
of repaired composite is less than half the strength of the original
material (Figure 5-25).
Even though repair is essential to the overall longevity of composite restorations, there are very few reports of formal investigations or long-term trials concerning composite repair. Two- to
3-year clinical results have been reported showing good outcomes
for repairs or the resealing of marginal defects, and a 7-year recall
reinforced the use of a conservative repair strategy. A survey of general practitioners found that half always repair defective composite
margins adjacent to enamel, but most replace a restoration if the
defective margin is adjacent to dentin. Thus the repair of composite restorations with defective margins adjacent to enamel is
becoming the standard of care.

Composite-Based Indirect Restorations
Composite materials can be used to make direct restorations
extraorally and fixes to prepared teeth with a composite-based
bonding agent called resin cement (Chapter 7, Resin Cements).
Two noted applications are resin veneers and composite inlays
and onlays.

Originally, resin veneering materials were heat-polymerized polymethylmethacrylate, which were improved subsequently by the
addition of fillers and crosslinking agents. Microfill materials that
use high-molecular-weight dimethacrylates as resin matrices have
created renewed interest in resin-veneered metal restorations.
These resins are polymerized using visible light or a combination
of heat and pressure. In general, these new microfill resins have
physical properties superior to those of the original unfilled resin.
The first resin veneers were mechanically bonded to metal substrates using wire loops or retention beads. Recent improvements
in bonding mechanisms have included micromechanical retention
created by acid etching the base metal alloy and the use of chemical
bonding systems such as 4-META, phosphorylated methacrylate,
epoxy resin, or silicon dioxide flame-sprayed to the metal surface,
followed by the application of a silane coupling agent (silicoating).
Prosthetic resin-veneering materials have several advantages
and disadvantages compared with ceramics. The advantages
include ease of fabrication, predictable intraoral reparability, and
less wear of opposing teeth or restorations. The drawbacks include
low proportional limit and pronounced plastic deformation,
which contribute to distortion on occlusal loading. Therefore the
resin should be protected with metal occlusal surfaces whenever
feasible. Leakage of oral fluids and staining below the veneers, particularly those attached mechanically, are caused by dimensional
changes from water sorption, heating, and cooling. Surface staining and intrinsic discoloration tend to occur with these resins.
Resins are also susceptible to wear during toothbrushing. Thus
instructing the patient on proper cleaning procedures using a
soft toothbrush and mild abrasive toothpastes is necessary. Resinveneered metal restorations are not suitable for use as removable
partial denture abutment retainers, where the clasp arm engages
an undercut on the veneered surface, because the resin is not as
wear resistant as porcelain.
Resin composites can also be used as a conservative alternative
to conventional prosthodontic restorations, such as veneers for
masking tooth discoloration or malformation. The resins are used
as preformed laminate veneers, in which resin shells are adjusted
by grinding, and the contoured facing is bonded to tooth structure
using the acid-etching technique with either chemical-activated,
visible-light−activated, or dual-cured resin cements. Resins used
to cement indirect restorations, veneers, and prosthetic devices are
similar to flowable restorative resins but are adjusted to match the
needs of luting applications.

Indirect Posterior Composites
Composites for the fabrication of onlays and inlays are polymerized
externally, and then luted to the tooth with a composite-base cement.
Indirect composite inlays or onlays reduce wear and leakage and overcome some of the limitations of resin composites. Several different
approaches to resin inlay construction have been proposed: (1) the
use of both direct and indirect fabrication methods; (2) the application of light, heat, pressure, or a combination of these curing systems;
and (3) the combined use of hybrid and microfill composites.
The fabrication process for direct composite inlays first requires
the application of a separating medium (e.g., agar solution or
glycerin) to the prepared tooth. The restorative resin pattern is
then formed, light-cured, and removed from the preparation. The
rough inlay is then exposed to additional light for approximately
4 to 6 min or heat at approximately 100 °C for 7 min, after which

CHAPTER 5

the preparation is etched, the inlay is cemented into place with
(typically) a dual-cured resin, and then it is polished.
Composite systems are also available as indirect products. Indirect inlay resins require an impression and a dental laboratory technician to fabricate the inlay. In addition to conventional light- and
heat-curing methods, laboratory processing may employ heat (e.g.,
140 °C) and pressure (e.g., 0.6 MPa for 10 min). The potential
advantage of these materials is that a significantly higher degree of
polymerization is attained, which improves physical properties and
resistance to wear. Because the polymerization is completed before
placement into the prepared teeth, there are no shrinkage-induced
stresses, and bond failures are reduced, which reduces the potential
for leakage. Furthermore, these resins are repairable in the mouth and
are not as abrasive to the opposing tooth structure as ceramic inlays.
Laboratory studies support these expected advantages: for
example, a recent review revealed that the annual clinical failure
rates in class I and II posterior stress-bearing cavities are the same
for composite inlays as for amalgam restorations (1.9%), somewhat superior to those for direct composites (3.6%), and only
slightly (but not significantly) inferior to cast gold inlays and
onlays (1.4%). However, the technique sensitivity for indirect
resin restoration systems remains high, and their appropriateness
as a substitute for amalgam or cast restorations in all posterior
applications is not clear, even though the esthetics are appealing.

Selection Criteria for Posterior Composites
Not all patients should be considered as candidates for these posterior restorations. The primary indication for using direct posterior
composites in place of amalgams is esthetics. Unless the patient’s
esthetic demands are high, there are minimal advantages to using
resin restorations in posterior regions. Often the disadvantages,
coupled with the difficulty in manipulation, far outweigh the benefits. Other indications might include the need for conservative
preparations along with conservation of tooth structure. Because
composite restorations do not depend on mechanical undercuts
for retention, the concepts of resistance form and retention form
do not really apply to resin preparations. However, because of
their inferior physical properties, composites should not be used
for cuspal coverage or for large restorations exceeding one-third
the buccolingual width of the tooth. If possible, the occlusal load
should always be borne by sound tooth structure and never by
resin. Because wear is also an issue, posterior composites should
not be placed in patients experiencing parafunctional habits.
Another lesser indication is the use of composites to minimize
thermal conduction. Because amalgam is metallic, the material
tends to conduct heat more rapidly, leading to tooth sensitivity

Selected Readings
Albers H: Tooth-Colored Restoratives: Principles and Techniques, 9th ed,
Hamilton, ON, 2002, BC Decker.
The author discusses a complete array of composite systems, with
emphasis on clinical applications. The book combines the science of
dental polymers with discussions of clinical applications.
Alvanforoush N, Palamara J, Wong RH, et al: Comparison between published clinical success of direct resin composite restorations in vital
posterior teeth in 1995–2005 and 2006–2016 periods, Aust Dent J
62:132–145, 2017.
Boaro LCC, Goncalves F, Guimarães TC, et al: Polymerization stress,
shrinkage and elastic modulus of current low-shrinkage restorative
composites, Dent Mater 26:1144–1150, 2010.

Resin-Based Composites

113

and pain. The placement of composites or ceramics, which are
good thermal insulators, often reduces this occurrence.

Photocuring Training, Evaluation, and
Process Management
In order to reach a high degree of cure, light-cured resins must
receive sufficient energy at the appropriate wavelengths. The light
energy delivered to the composite is dictated by the operator technique of focusing light on the restoration, the type of curing light,
and the location of the restoration, and the energy needed for
proper curing depends on the type of resin used. Clinicians may
have dental radiometers to measure the irradiance at the emitting
tip of a curing light but might not be certain if sufficient energy has
been delivered to the restoration to reach an adequate cure level and
depth of cure.
The “MARC” (an acronym for “managing accurate resin curing,” BlueLight Analytics Inc., Halifax, NS) device and training
system shifts the paradigm away from measuring the average
irradiance of a curing light and only including the wavelengths
and energy actually received by the resin being polymerized. The
MARC device combines precise laboratory spectral technology
with clinically relevant measuring conditions within prepared dentoform teeth in a mannequin head. Spectrum-corrected sensors
inside the dentoform teeth are attached to a laboratory-grade spectroradiometer embedded within the manikin’s head to record the
light received from curing units. Output from the spectrometer is
fed into a laptop computer, where custom software provides realtime and accumulated comparison data: spectral irradiance, total
energy delivered over a given exposure duration, and the estimated
exposure duration needed to deliver a specified energy dosage.
In addition to providing real-time feedback to judge when
adequate photoenergy has been delivered, the MARC device can
also be used as a training aid for performing optimal photocuring in clinics. The effect of minor alterations in tip distance and
angle and movement during exposure is displayed in real time, and
the ultimate consequence in terms of altered energy delivered is
determined. The device can also be used to determine the ability
of various lamps to deliver adequate energy levels between different
tooth locations.

Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Josephine EsquivelUpshaw and Dr. Barry K. Norling for their contribution to the
previous edition of this chapter.
This investigation found that not all composites that claimed “lowshrinkage” exhibited reduced polymerization shrinkage. It was also
concluded that in order to effectively reduce polymerization stress
[not just shrinkage], a low post-gel shrinkage must be accompanied
by a relatively low elastic modulus.
Chen M-H: Update on dental nanocomposites, J Dent Res 89:549–560,
2010.
This article reviews recent studies of the development of dental nanocomposites and their clinical applications, as of 2010.
Darvell BW: Materials Science for Dentistry, 10th ed, Cambridge, UK, 2018,
Woodhead Publishing Ltd.
A comprehensive dental materials science textbook that connects clinical
performance properties to first principles and underlying mechanisms
in much greater detail than is typically presented to dental students. An

114

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

excellent reference for researchers, materials scientists, and those in academic dentistry, as well as students at all levels.
Dietz W, Montag R, Kraft U, et al: 15-year results of posterior composite
restorations using three-dimensional scanning electron microscopy,
J Dent 42:959–969, 2014.
Ferracane JL: Resin composite—state of the art, Dent Mater 27:29–38,
2011.
This review concludes that in 2010, the commercial materials available to the dental profession were of high quality and when used
appropriately have proven to deliver excellent clinical outcomes of
adequate longevity.

Peterson J, Rizk M, Hoch M, et al: Bonding performance of self-adhesive
flowable composites to enamel, dentin and a nano-hybrid composite,
Odontology 106:171–180, 2018.
van Dijken JW, Pallesen U: Posterior bulk-filled resin composite restorations:
A 5-year randomized controlled clinical study, J Dent 51:29–35, 2016.
van Dijken JWV, Pallesen U, Benetti A: A randomized controlled evaluation of posterior resin restorations of an altered resin modified glassionomer cement with claimed bioactivity, Dent Mater 35:335–343,
2019.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web version)
Useful Websites
The Biomaterials Network: https://biomat.net/site2/
Clinicians Report: https://www.cliniciansreport.org/
Dental Advisor: http://www.dentaladvisor.com/
Dentistry Today: https://www.dentistrytoday.com/dental-materials/972.
Managing Accurate Resin Curing (MARC): https://www.bluelightanalytics
.com/checkup.
Ormocer technology: https://www.ormocere.de/en.html
Polymer Science Learning Center, Macrogalleria—acrylic polymers:
http://www.pslc.ws/mactest/level3.htm.
POSS Technology, Hybrid Plastics: https://hybridplastics.com/us/what-is-poss/
Virtual Textbook of Polymer Science: http://plc.case.edu/tutorial/
enhanced/files/textbook.htm.
Publications and Patents
Academy of Dental Materials: International Congress on Dental Materials, Transactions, Houston, TX, 1990, Academy of Dental Materials,
Baylor College of Dentistry.
A host of review papers are presented on many aspects of dental composite chemistry, systems usage, dentin bonding agents, and microleakage.
Albers H: Tooth-Colored Restoratives: Principles and Techniques, 9th ed,
Hamilton, ON, 2002, BC Decker.
The author discusses a complete array of composite systems, with
emphasis on clinical applications. The book combines the science of
dental polymers with discussions of clinical applications.
Alvanforoush N, Palamara J, Wong RH, et al: Comparison between
published clinical success of direct resin composite restorations in
vital posterior teeth in 1995–2005 and 2006–2016 periods, Aust
Dent J 62:132–145, 2017.
Boaro LCC, Goncalves F, Guimarães TC, et al: Polymerization stress,
shrinkage and elastic modulus of current low-shrinkage restorative
composites, Dent Mater 26:1144–1150, 2010.
This investigation found that not all composites that claimed “lowshrinkage” exhibited reduced polymerization shrinkage. It was also
concluded that in order to effectively reduce polymerization stress (not
just shrinkage), a low postgel shrinkage must be accompanied by a
relatively low elastic modulus.
Bowen RL: Dental filling material comprising vinyl-silane treated fused
silica and a binder consisting of the reaction product of bisphenol A
and glycidyl methacrylate 112, Washington, DC, 1962, US Patent
3,006, US Patent and Trademark Office.
This patent marks a milestone in dentistry. It resulted in superior
resin-based materials and was issued a few years after Buonocore’s
discovery that resins could be bonded to acid-etched enamel. With
Bowen’s invention and Buonocore’s discovery, it became possible to
restore class IV cavities in a conservative and predictable way, which
had been impossible previously.
Chadwick BL, Dummer PMH, Dunstan F, et al: The Longevity of Dental
Restorations: A Systematic Review, York, UK, 2001, National Health
Service Centre for Reviews and Dissemination University of York.
A comprehensive evidence-based review of dental restorations.
Chen M-H: Update on dental nanocomposites, J Dent Res 89:549–560,
2010.
This article reviews recent studies of the development of dental nanocomposites and their clinical applications, as of 2010.
da Rosa Rodolpho PA, Cenci MS, Donassollo TA, et al: A clinical evaluation of posterior composite restorations: 17-year findings, J Dent
34:427–435, 2006.
Darvell BW: Glossary of Terms for Dental Materials Science, 11th ed, Cambridge, UK, 2011, Kuwait Publishing Ltd.
Darvell BW: Materials Science for Dentistry, 10th ed, Cambridge,
UK, 2018, Woodhead Publishing Ltd.
A comprehensive dental materials science textbook that connects clinical performance properties to first principles and underlying mechanisms in much greater detail than is typically presented to dental

students. An excellent reference for researchers, materials scientists,
and those in academic dentistry, as well as students at all levels.
Da Rosa Rodolpho PA, Donassollo TA, Cenci MS, et al: 22-year clinical
evaluation of the performance of two posterior composites with different filler characteristics, Dent Mater 27:955–963, 2011.
Dietz W, Montag R, Kraft U, et al: 15-year results of posterior composite restorations using three-dimensional scanning electron
microscopy, J Dent 42:959–969, 2014.
Drummond JL: Degradation, fatigue, and failure of resin dental composite materials, J Dent Res 87:710–719, 2008.
Ferracane JL: Resin composite—state of the art, Dent Mater 27:29–
38, 2011.
This review concludes that in 2010, the commercial materials available to the dental profession were of high quality and when used
appropriately have proven to deliver excellent clinical outcomes of
adequate longevity.
Gaengler P, Hoyer I, Montag R: Micromorphological evaluation of posterior composite restorations—a 10-year report, J Oral Rehabil 31:991–
1000, 2004.
Gallegos LL, Nicholls JI: In vitro two-body wear of three veneering resins,
J Prosthet Dent 60:172–178, 1988.
Three veneering resins were tested for wear. A significant difference in
wear against porcelain was found among the three resins, but no difference in wear was found against enamel.
Hilton TJ, Ferracane JL, Broome J (editors): Summitt’s Fundamentals of
Operative Dentistry: A Contemporary Approach, 4th ed, 2013, Chicago,
Quintessence.
The technical procedures used in the placement of resin-based composites in various types of restorations are discussed and illustrated.
Many clinical illustrations are included that show the variety of applications for dental composites.
Joniot SB, Gregoire GL, Auther AM, et al: Three dimensional optical profilometry analysis of surface states obtained after finishing sequences
for three resin-based composites, Oper Dent 25:311–315, 2000.
Khurana S, Rammal S, Ben-Jonathan N: Exposure of newborn male and
female rats to environmental estrogens: Delayed and sustained hyperprolactinemia and alterations in estrogen receptor expression, Endocrinology 141:4512–4517, 2000.
Kramer N, Reinelt C, Frankenberger R: Ten-year clinical performance
of posterior resin composite restorations, J Adhes Dent 17:433–441,
2015.
Lambrechts P, Braem M, Vanherle G: Evaluation of clinical performance
for posterior resin-based composites and dentin adhesives, Oper Dent
12:53–58, 1987.
These authors have been leaders in the clinical evaluation of resin systems. This paper is a superb treatment of the subject and emphasizes the
limitations of current adhesives and composites.
Lutz F, Phillips RW: A classification and evaluation of composite resin
systems, J Prosthet Dent 50:480–488, 1983.
This article presents a structure-based classification scheme for composites, one that has been almost universally accepted since its publication. Knowledge of the structure makes it possible to make decisions
as to the inherent properties and selection for specific situations. (See
also Willems et al., 1992.)
Malhotra N, Mala K: Light-curing considerations for resin-based
composite materials: a review. Part I, Compend Contin Educ Dent
31(7):498–505, 2010, ibid, Part II, 31(8):584–591, 2010.
These articles provide an excellent overview of the performance and
limitations of four types of curing lights for resin-based composites:
LED, QTH, PAC, and laser curing. The type of curing light and curing mode impact the polymerization kinetics of resin-based composite
(RBC) materials. They also affect the polymerization shrinkage and
associated stresses, microhardness, depth of cure, degree of conversion, and color change of RBCs. These factors can also influence the
microleakage in an RBC restoration. Apart from the type of unit and
mode used, the polymerization of RBCs is also affected by how a
light-curing unit is used and handled, as well as the aspects associated
with RBCs and the environment. Part II discusses the various clini114.e1

cal issues that should be considered while curing RBC restorations in
order to achieve the best possible outcome.
Manhart J, Chen HY, Hamm G, et al: Review of the clinical survival of
direct and indirect restorations in posterior teeth of the permanent
dentition, Oper Dent 29:481–508, 2004.
These reviewers surveyed the literature from about 1990 to 2004 to
assess the longevity of restorations in stress-bearing posterior cavities,
and possible reasons for clinical failure. Indirect resin restorations
were found to have lower annual failure rates than direct restorations
(P = 0.0031). Principal reasons for failure were secondary caries, fracture, marginal deficiencies, wear, and postoperative sensitivity.
Manhart J, Chen HY, Hickel R: The suitability of packable resin-based
composites for posterior restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 132:639–645,
2001.
Manhart J, Kunzelmann K-H, Chen HY, et al: Mechanical properties of
new composite restorative materials, J Biomed Mater Res (A) 53:353–
361, 2000.
An evaluation of the new class of hybrid composites known as “packable” or “condensable.” These authors demonstrate that although the
handling character of these materials is analogous to that of lathe-cut
amalgams, they do not offer any other advantage compared with other
hybrid composites as restorative resins.
Naciff JM, Jump ML, Torontalli SM, et al: Gene expression profile
induced by 17 alpha-ethynyl estradiol, bisphenol A and genistein
in the developing female reproductive system of the rat, Toxicol Sci
68:184–199, 2002.
Nagakane K, Yoshida Y, Hirata I, et al: Analysis of chemical interaction
of 4-MET with hydroxyapatite using XPS, Dent Mater J 25:645–649,
2006.
Olea N, Pulgar R, Perez P, et al: Estrogenicity of resin-based composites
and sealants used in dentistry, Environ Health Perspect 104:298–305,
1996.
Opdam NJM, Bronkhorst EM, Roeters JM, et al: A retrospective clinical
study on longevity of posterior composite and amalgam restorations,
Dent Mater 23:2–8, 2007.
Paris F, Balaguer P, Terouanne B, et al: Phenylphenols, biphenols, bisphenol-A and 4-tert-octylphenol exhibit alpha and beta estrogen activities
and antiandrogen activity in reporter cell lines, Mol Cell Endocrinol
193:43–49, 2002.
This article concludes that the environmental chemicals studied may have
a negative impact on androgen action during fetal and postnatal life.
Peterson J, Rizk M, Hoch M, et al: Bonding performance of self-adhesive flowable composites to enamel, dentin and a nano-hybrid
composite, Odontology 106:171–180, 2018.
Price RB, Felix CM, Whalen JM: Factors affecting the energy delivered to simulated class I and class V preparations, J Can Dent Assoc
76(A94):1–9, 2010.
Price RB, Labrie D, Whalen JM, et al: Effect of distance on irradiance and
beam homogeneity from four light-emitting diode curing units, J Can
Dent Assoc 77:B9, 2011.
These two articles by Price et al. present an analysis of both technical
variations among curing lamps and human operator variables on clinical outcomes and implications for best practice techniques.
Ramos RP, Chinelatti MA, Chimello DT, et al: Assessing microleakage in resin composite restorations rebounded with a surface sealant
and three low-viscosity resin systems, Quintessence Int 33:450–456,
2002.
Raskin A, Michotte-Theall B, Vreven J, et al: Clinical evaluation of a posterior composite 10-year report, J Dent 27:13–19, 1999.
Roulet J-F: Degradation of Dental Polymers, 1987, Basel and New York,
Karger.
A thorough discussion is presented of the chemistry and composition of modern dental restorative resins. Emphasis is placed on how
composition and clinical usage influence the longevity of a restorative
material in vivo.

114.e2

Roulet J-F: The problems associated with substituting resin-based composites for amalgam: a status report on posterior composites, J Dent
16:101, 1988.
A comprehensive review is presented of the factors to be considered in
the use of posterior composites as an alternative to dental amalgam.
The author concludes that the indications for posterior composites
are very limited.
Rueggeberg FA: An Expert’s Buying Guide for Curing Lights. ADA Professional Product Review 4, Chicago, IL, 2009, American Dental Association, pp 13–16.
Schafer TE, Lapp CA, Hanes CM, et al: Estrogenicity of bisphenol A and
bisphenol A dimethacrylate in vitro, J Biomed Mater Res 45:192–197,
1999.
Setcos JC, Tarim B, Suzuki S: Surface finish produced on resin composites by new polishing systems, Quintessence Int 30:169–173, 1999.
Shimizu T, Kitano T, Inoue M, et al: Ten-year longitudinal clinical evaluation of a visible light cured posterior composite resin, Dent Mater J
14:120–134, 1995.
Trujillo-Lemon M, Ge J, Lu H, et al: Dimethacrylate derivatives of dimer
acid, J Polym Sci: Part A Polym Chem 44:3921–3929, 2006.
Article on N’Durance, a high-molecular-weight, phase-separating
dicarbamate with composite resin having hydrophobic side chains.
van de Sande FH, Rodolpho PA, Basso GR, et al: 18-Year survival of
posterior composite resin restorations with and without glass ionomer
cement as base, Dent Mater 31:669–675, 2015.
van Dijken JW, Pallesen U: A randomized 10-year prospective follow-up
of class II nanohybrid and conventional hybrid resin composite restorations, J Adhes Dent 16:585–592, 2014.
van Dijken JW, Pallesen U: Posterior bulk-filled resin composite restorations: A 5-year randomized controlled clinical study, J Dent
51:29–35, 2016.
van Dijken JWV, Pallesen U, Benetti A: A randomized controlled
evaluation of posterior resin restorations of an altered resin modified glass-ionomer cement with claimed bioactivity, Dent Mater
35:335–343, 2019.
Wang R, Shi Y, Li T, et al: Adhesive interfacial characteristics and the
related bonding performance of four self-etching adhesives with different functional monomers applied to dentin, J Dent 62:72–80,
2017.
Weinmann W, Thalacker C, Guggenberger R: Siloranes in dental composites, Dent Mater 21:68–74, 2005.
Wendt SL Jr, Leinfelder KF: The clinical evaluation of heat-treated composite resin inlays, J Am Dent Assoc 120:177–181, 1990.
One of a few papers available that report the clinical performance of
heat-polymerized composite inlays. Although marginal integrity was
superior, no difference was detected in wear resistance compared with
light-cured inlays.
Wilder AD Jr, May KN Jr, Bayne SC, et al: Seventeen-year clinical study
of ultraviolet-cured posterior composite class I and II restorations,
J Esthet Dent 11:135–142, 1999.
Willems G, Lambrechts P, Braem M, et al: A classification of dental composites according to morphological and mechanical characteristics,
Dent Mater 81:310–319, 1992.
A classification scheme for composites, based on structure, that revises
and updates the earlier one of Lutz and Phillips (1983).
Wolter H, Storch W, Ott H: New inorganic/organic copolymers (ORMOCERS) for dental applications, Mat Res Soc Symp Proc 346:143–149, 1994.
Wu J, Mather RT: POSS polymers: Physical properties and biomaterials
applications, J Macromol Sci R, Part C: Polymer Rev 49:25–63, 2009.
Yap AUJ, Sau CW, Lye KW: Effects of finishing/polishing time on surface
characteristics of tooth-colored restoratives, J Oral Rehabil 25:456–
461, 1998.
Yap AUJ, Wong ML, Lim AC: The effect of polishing systems on microleakage of tooth-coloured restoratives. Part 2: Composite and polyacidmodified resin-based composites, J Oral Rehabil 27:205–210, 2000.

6

Bonding and Bonding Agents
OUTLINE
Historical Background

Dentin-Bonding Agents

Mechanisms of Adhesion

Luting Agents

Acid-Etch Technique

Applications in Orthodontic, Endodontic, and Preventive Dentistry

Process and Procedural Factors

KEY TERMS
Acid-etching/acid-etch technique The process of cleaning
and roughening a solid surface by exposing it to an acid and
thoroughly rinsing the residue to promote micromechanical
bonding of an adhesive to the surface.
Adhesion A molecular or atomic attraction between two contacting
surfaces promoted by the interfacial force of attraction between
the molecules or atoms of two different materials. Adhesion may
occur as chemical adhesion (formation of covalent bonds, hydrogen
bonds, or polar bonds via van der Waals attraction), mechanical
adhesion (structural interlocking), or a combination of both types.
Cement/cementing Substance that hardens from a viscous state
to a solid union between two surfaces. For dental applications,
cements act as a base, liner, restorative filling material, or adhesive to bond devices and prostheses to tooth structure or to
each other. See also Luting agent.
Contact angle Angle of intersection between a liquid and a surface
of a solid that is measured from the solid surface through the liquid
to the liquid–vapor tangent line originating at the terminus of the
liquid–solid interface; used as a measure of wettability, whereby
absolutely no wetting occurs at a contact angle of 180 degrees and
complete wetting occurs at an angle of 0 degrees.
Dentin-bonding agent A thin layer of resin between conditioned
dentin and the resin matrix of a resin-based composite restorative material.

Dentin conditioner An acidic agent that dissolves the inorganic
structure in dentin, resulting in a collagen mesh that allows
infiltration of an adhesive resin.
Hybrid layer An intermediate layer of resin, collagen, and dentin
that is produced by acid-etching of dentin and infiltration of
resin into the conditioned dentin.
Luting agent A viscous, cement-like material that also fills a gap
between the bonded materials. It originally referred to nonadhesive agents only but now also includes adhesive agents.
Microleakage The flow of oral fluid and bacteria into the microscopic gap between a prepared tooth surface and a restorative material.
Obturation In endodontic dentistry, filling of a root canal completely and densely with a nonirritating hermetic sealing agent
to prevent leakage.
Primer A hydrophilic, low-viscosity resin that promotes bonding
to a moist substrate, such as dentin.
Resin tag Extension of resin that has penetrated into etched
enamel or dentin. Resin tags form micromechanical interlocks
analogous to screw threads.
Smear layer Poorly adherent layer of ground dentin produced by
cutting a dentin surface; also, a tenacious deposit of microscopic debris that covers enamel and dentin surfaces that have been
prepared for a restoration.

Bonding and adhesion comprise a complex set of physical, chemical, and mechanical mechanisms that allow the attachment and binding of one substance to another. A dental bonding system performs
three essential functions: (1) provides resistance to separation of an
adherend substrate (i.e., enamel, dentin, metal, composite, ceramic)
from a restorative or cementing material; (2) distributes stress along
bonded interfaces; and (3) seals the interface via adhesive bonding
between dentin and/or enamel and the bonded material, thus increasing resistance to microleakage and decreasing the risk for postoperative sensitivity, marginal staining, and secondary caries. The science of
adhesion has been covered in Chapter 2, Adhesion and Bonding. In
this chapter, only those principles needed to understand dental bonding are discussed.

Historical Background
In 1949, Oskar Hagger, at the De Trey division of Amalgamated
Dental, developed the first dental adhesive for dentin, Sevritron
Cavity Seal. This system comprised glycerophosphoric acid
dimethacrylate, which should have made it a self-etching adhesive
for both enamel and dentin by the discussion later. However, this
product had very limited clinical durability because of the large
interfacial stresses caused by the high polymerization shrinkage
stress and high thermal expansion of the unfilled methacrylatebased resins used at the time.
Later, Michael Buonocore investigated the use of strong acids and
discovered that phosphoric acid provides superior enamel etching,
115

116

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Nonbonded
composites

1960

Acid-etching and
enamel bonding

1970

Dentin-bonded
composites

1980

3-Step , 2-step, 1-step
Dentin bonding systems

1990

Current
time

2000

Buonocore Bowen introduces
Fusayama pioneers Nakabayashi describes Kanka introduces
reports acid- NPG-GMA as the
total-etch of dentin resin infiltration of
technique of wet
etching of
1st-generation dentin and enamel
dentin bonding
dentin collagen to
enamel
bonding agent
form a “hybrid” layer

2010

2020

Self-etching and
self-adhesive bonding
systems developed

• Figure 6-1 Major turning points and events in dental bonding technologies.

and it is still in use today. As shown in Figure 6-1, Buonocore’s
discovery of acid-etching led to the ability to produce clean, highenergy, roughened enamel surfaces capable of establishing a durable
micromechanical retentive interface with resin-based cements and
restorative materials, which launched the current era of adhesive dentistry. This led to burgeoning growth in the development of adhesive
materials and bonding techniques, as summarized in Figure 6-1 and
discussed in detail in several later sections of this chapter.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Is good wetting of tooth structure by a dental adhesive adequate for longterm adhesive bonding of a restorative material?

Mechanisms of Adhesion
A means of true adhesion bonding (i.e., through chemical attraction
and/or micromechanical interlocking) has been sought for decades
and has recently been realized. For true adhesion of restorative
materials to tooth structure, three conditions must be satisfied:
1. Sound tooth structure must be conserved
2. Optimal retention must be achieved
3. Microleakage must be prevented
Dental hard tissues and their environment are complex. However, the fundamental mechanism of adhesion to tooth structure
can be regarded as an exchange by which mineral tooth material (hydroxyapatite) is replaced by synthetic resins. This process
involves two steps: (1) removing hydroxyapatite to create micropores and (2) infiltration of resin monomers into the micropores
and subsequent polymerization. As a result, resin tags form that
micromechanically interlock (or interpenetrate) with the hard tissue. There may also be chemical interactions with the tooth substrate if monomers having acidic or chelating functional groups
are present. In general, the following factors can play major or
minor roles in achieving adhesive bonds:
1. Surface energy and wetting
2. Interpenetration (formation of a hybrid zone)
3. Micromechanical interlocking
4. Chemical bonding
Wetting is the essential first step for the success of all adhesion
mechanisms. An adhesive cannot form micromechanical interlocks, chemical bonds, or interpenetrating networks with a surface
unless it can form intimate contact with the surface, spread over it,
displace air pockets, and penetrate by capillary attraction into any
microscopic and submicroscopic irregularities. These conditions
are, by definition, achieved if the adhesive wets the surface.
As explained in Chapter 2, Contact Angle of Wetting, the wettability of a liquid on a solid can be characterized by the contact

angle that forms between a liquid and solid, as measured within
the liquid. Categories of wettability include “absolutely no wetting”
(contact angle of 180 degrees), “mostly nonwetting” (>90 degrees),
“mostly wetting” (<90 degrees), and absolute wetting (0 degrees).
See Figure 2-40 for a schematic illustration of wetting situations.
Wetting is essential for intraoral adhesion but is not sufficient
to ensure durable bonding. To achieve strong bonding through
the micromechanical interlocking mechanism, wetting monomers
must intimately adapt to enamel and fill enamel surface irregularities and/or infiltrate into a demineralized collagen network in
dentin. Some acid monomers with a phosphate (e.g., phenyl-P)
or carboxyl group (e.g., 4-MET) have the additional potential of
forming chemical bonds with calcium in the residual tooth tissue.
Specific monomers with these types of functional groups will be
discussed later.
Generally, wettability can be enhanced by increasing the
surface energy of the substrates (e.g., dentin, enamel, and
synthetic materials such as ceramics). Because a clean, microroughened tooth surface has higher surface energy than unprepared tooth surfaces, organic adhesives are inherently able to
wet and spread over such a surface unless a low-surface-tension
material contaminates the surface before the adhesive can be
applied. The acid-etch technique, by which contaminants
are removed and microporosities are created, is widely used to
generate high-energy tooth surfaces and promote wetting by
adhesive monomers.

Acid-Etch Technique
Whenever both enamel and dentin tissues are mechanically cut,
especially with a rotary instrument, a layer of loosely held debris
and organic film known as a smear layer is left on their surfaces
and prevents strong bonding. Different quantities and qualities of
smear layer are produced by various cutting and instrumentation
techniques, which play an important role in both restorative and
endodontic treatments, as explained further in Chapter 7, Clinical
Manipulation. In dentin, the smear layer becomes burnished into
the underlying dentinal tubules and lowers dentin permeability,
which is a protective effect. However, it is also a very weakly cohesive material and thus detaches easily, consequently interfering
with strong bonding. Thus various cleaning or treatment agents
and procedures must be employed to remove the smear layer and
expose the intact substrate for bonding. As explained in greater
detail in the discussion that follows, acid-etching is used to remove
the smear layer from both enamel and dentin. Alternatively, in
dentin, the smear layer can be left partially in place and modified
such that adhesive resins penetrate through it and bond to the
intact dentin structures below.

CHAPTER 6

Bonding and Bonding Agents

117

• Figure 6-2 Surface of etched enamel in which the centers of enamel
rods have been preferentially dissolved by phosphoric acid. (Courtesy
K-J Söderholm.)

• Figure 6-3 Scanning electron microscopy image of tags formed by the

Enamel Etching
The first meaningful demonstration of intraoral adhesion was
reported by Michael Buonocore (Figure 6-1). He etched enamel
surfaces with various acids, placed an acrylic restorative material
on the micromechanically roughened surfaces, and found a substantial increase in the resin–enamel-bond strength (~20 MPa).
One of the surface-conditioning agents he used, phosphoric acid,
is still the most widely used etchant for bonding to both enamel
and dentin. Depending on the concentration, phosphoric acid
removes the smear layer and about 10 microns of enamel to expose
prisms of enamel rods and create a honeycomb-like, high-energy
retentive surface (Figure 6-2). The higher surface energy ensures
that resin monomers will readily wet the surface, infiltrate into
the micropores, and polymerize to form resin tags (Figure 6-3).
The pattern of etching enamel may vary from selective dissolution of either the enamel rod centers (type I etching), as shown in
Figure 6-2, or the peripheral areas (type II etching), as indicated
by the resin tags in Figure 6-3. In either case, the resin tags are
about 6 μm in diameter and 10 to 20 μm in length.
Prior to the introduction of enamel acid-etching and the use of
enamel-bonding agents, restorative materials were placed directly
on the smear layer of the prepared tooth. It is evident that the apparent bond strength measured would be the cohesive strength of the
smear layer to the tooth structure. As a result, debonding and leakage of oral fluids within the microscopic space between prepared
teeth and restorative materials was an ongoing problem. Stronger
and longer-lasting bonds result if the smear layer is removed because
resins can then directly bond to the intact hard tissue.

Dentin Etching
As illustrated in Figure 6-1, dentin etching did not gain wide acceptance until Fusayama introduced the total-etch concept in 1979.
For this method, both dentin and enamel are etched simultaneously,
typically using 37% phosphoric acid. His study demonstrated that
not only was retention substantially increased, but also pulp damage
did not occur, as had been generally assumed. A subsequent study
by Nakabayashi et al. revealed that hydrophilic resins can infiltrate

penetration of resin into etched areas of enamel. The resin was applied to
the etched enamel, and enamel was then dissolved by acid to reveal the
tags (×5000). (Courtesy K-J Söderholm.)

the surface layer of acid-demineralized collagen fibers produced in
etched dentin and form a layer of resin-infiltrated dentin with high
cohesive strength. Such a hybrid layer structure forms very strong
resin bonds through the development of an interpenetrating network of polymer and dentinal collagen, together with numerous
micromechanical interlocks at the resin–hybrid layer interface. By
the early 1990s, dentin etching had gained worldwide acceptance.
Because the total-etch technique usually involves etching with an
acid followed by rinsing to remove the acid, this technique is also
known as the etch-and-rinse technique.
Dentin etching is more technique sensitive than enamel etching because of the complexity of the dentin structure. Dentin
consists of 50 vol% (volume percentage) of calcium phosphate
mineral (hydroxyapatite), 30 vol% of organic material (mainly
type I collagen), and 20 vol% fluid. Acid-etching removes
hydroxyapatite almost completely from several microns of sound
dentin, exposing a microporous network of collagen suspended
in water. Whereas etched enamel must be completely dry to form
a strong bond with hydrophobic adhesive resins, etched dentin
must be moist to form a hybrid layer. The amount of water left
in etched dentin is critical. If insufficient water is present, the
collagen network will collapse and produce a relatively impermeable layer that prevents resin infiltration and subsequent hybridization. If too much water remains, resin infiltration cannot fully
replace the water in the collagen network and, consequently, sets
the condition for later leakage into those locations. Therefore a
priming step is required to maintain a hydrated collagen network while removing excess water (see details in the following
sections).

Process and Procedural Factors
Several aspects of the total-etch, etch-and-rinse, and related techniques
are critical to the success or failure of bonding systems, as discussed next.

118

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Etching Time

Dentin-Bonding Agents

The optimal application time for the etchant may vary somewhat,
depending on previous exposure of the tooth surface to fluoride
and other factors. For example, a permanent tooth with high fluoride content may require a longer etching time, as do primary
teeth. In the latter, increased surface conditioning time is needed
to enhance the etching pattern on primary tooth enamel that is
more aprismatic than permanent tooth enamel. Currently, the
etching time for most etching gels is approximately 15 seconds.
The advantage of such short etching times is that they yield
acceptable bond strength in most instances while conserving
enamel and reducing treatment time.

Dental-bonding agents are designed to provide a sufficiently
strong interface between restorative composites and tooth structure to withstand mechanical forces and shrinkage stress. The success of adhesives is dependent on two types of bonding:
1. Micromechanical interlocking, chemical bonding of the
bonding agent with enamel and dentin, or both
2. Copolymerization of the bonding resin with the resin matrix
of composite materials
Until the total-etch technique was adopted, bonding agents
were used only to enhance the wetting and adaptation of resin
to conditioned enamel surfaces. These bonding agents are made
by combining various dimethacrylates used in resin composites
(e.g., bis-GMA) with diluting monomers (e.g., triethylene glycol
dimethacrylate [TEGDMA]; Figure 6-4) to control viscosity and
to enhance wetting. These agents have little or no potential for
chemical bonding, but they improve micromechanical bonding
by optimal formation of resins tags within the etched enamel.
Because enamel can be kept fairly dry, these rather hydrophobic
resins perform well as long as they are restricted to enamel. They
are generally called enamel-bonding agents.
Since the inception of the total-etch concept, in which both
dentin and enamel are etched simultaneously, enamel-bonding
agents have been replaced by the same systems that are used on
dentin. The benefit is the ability to simultaneously bond resin
to both enamel and dentin, leading to substantial improvements
in bond strength. Numerous chemistries have been investigated,
developed, and marketed in the search for adhesive systems that
can produce strong, permanent bonds to dentin. Therefore the
focus of discussion is on dentin-bonding agents.
As discussed in the section on adhesion in Chapter 2, Bonding
to Tooth Structure, and in an earlier section of this chapter, a successful dentin-bonding system must meet several requirements:
1. Adequate removal or dissolution of the smear layer from
enamel and dentin
2. Maintenance or reconstitution of the dentin collagen matrix
3. Good wetting and efficient monomer penetration into the
collagen matrix
4. Polymerization within the collagen mesh to form a hybrid
layer
5. Copolymerization with the resin composite matrix

Rinsing and Drying Stage
Once the tooth is etched, the acid should be rinsed away thoroughly with a stream of water for about 20 seconds, and the
water must be removed. When enamel alone is etched and is to
be bonded with a hydrophobic resin (e.g., bisphenol-A glycidyl
dimethacrylate [bis-GMA]–based resin; see Chapter 5, Composition and Function), it must be dried completely with warm air
until it takes on a white, frosted appearance. Dentin, in contrast,
cannot withstand such aggressive drying, which would cause
bond failure because of the formation of impermeable, collapsed
collagen fibers. In the total-etch technique, a dentin-bonding
agent and primer must be used that are compatible with both
moist dentin and moist enamel.

Cleanness of the Bonding Surfaces
To form a sound mechanical bond, etched surfaces must be kept
free of contamination and sufficiently dry until the resin is placed.
Although etching raises the surface energy, contamination can
readily reduce the energy level of the etched surface. Reducing the
surface energy, in turn, makes it more difficult to wet the surface
with a bonding resin that may have too high of a surface tension
to wet the contaminated surface. Thus even momentary contact
with saliva or blood can prevent effective resin-tag formation and
severely reduce bond strength. Another potential contaminant is
oil that is released from the air compressor and transported along
the air lines to the air–water syringe. If contamination occurs, the
contaminant should be removed, and the surface should be etched
again for 10 seconds.

Other Factors
The acid-etch technique was not widely used in the years immediately following its introduction (Figure 6-1). The principal reason was the inferior properties of the unfilled acrylic restorative
materials used at that time. With those resins, high polymerization shrinkage (>6 vol%) and coefficients of thermal expansion
in excess of 100 ppm/°C generated interfacial stresses sufficient
to rupture the bond to etched enamel. After highly filled resinbased composites were marketed beginning in the mid-1960s, the
acid-etch technique was “rediscovered.” Therefore, the choice of
restorative materials also plays an important factor in the success
of bonding.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What types of bond formation result from the use of dentin-bonding agents?

Composition of Dentin-Bonding Agents
Irrespective of the number of components (see Table 6-1), a typical
dentin-bonding system includes etchants, primers, solvents, resin
monomers, initiators and inhibitors, reinforcing fillers, and sometimes other functional ingredients such as antimicrobial agents.

Etchants
Enamel and dentin etchants are strong acids (pH = 1 to 2) used
to remove smear layers and to dissolve the mineral phase so as to
form micromechanical interlocking. A number of acidic agents
have been used to produce the required microporosity. However,
phosphoric acid, typically at 37%, produces consistent etching
patterns while not damaging the pulp. Phosphoric acid concentrations greater than 50% result in the deposition of monocalcium
phosphate monohydrate on the etched surface, which inhibits further dissolution. The etchant is usually supplied as an aqueous gel
to allow precise placement over a specific area. Brushes are used to
place the acidic gel, or the acid may be supplied in a disposable

Bonding and Bonding Agents

CHAPTER 6

Monomers with surface active and/or adhesive functional groups
HEMA
H2C

CH3

C

O CH2

CO

CH2

OH

HEMA-phosphate
H2C

CH3

C

OH

CO

O CH2

CH2

P

O

OH

O
Phenyl-P
H2C

CH3

C

OH

CO

O CH2

CH2

O

O

10-MDP
H2 C

O

P

CH3

C

OH

CO

O CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

O

P

OH

O

4-MET
H 2C

C

CH3
CO

O CH2

CH2

O

CO

COOH
COOH

4-META
H2C

CH3

C

O

CO

O CH2

CH2

O CO

C
C

MAC-10
H2C

O

CH3

C

O

O CH2

CO

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH

CH2

N

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2 CH

COOH
COOH

Methacrylamide
H2 C

C

CH3
CO

NH2

NPG-GMA
H2C

C

CH3
CO

O CH2

CH2 COOH

OH

CH3
Monomers with crosslinking and copolymerizing functions
Bis-GMA
H2C

C

CH3
CO

CH3

CH3
O CH2

CH

CH2

O

O CH2

C

CH2 O OC

C

CH2

OH

CH3

OH

CH

UDMA
H2 C

C

CH3
CO

O CH2 CH2 O CO NH CH2

CH

CH3

CH3

CH3
CH2

C

CH2 CH2 NH

CO O

CH2

CH2

CH3
TEGDMA
H2 C

C

CH3

CH3
CO

O CH2 CH2 O

CH2

CH2

O

CH2 CH2

O

OC

C

CH2

• Figure 6-4 Structures of representative monomers used in enamel- and dentin-bonding agents.

O

OC

C

CH2

119

120

PA RT I I

TABLE 6-1

Direct Restorative Materials

Classification of Dental Bonding Systems and Representative Examples of Commercial Products
Currently Available for Clinical Use
ETCH AND RINSE

SELF-ETCH

Three Step (4th generation)

Two Step (5th generation)

Two Step (6th generation)

One Step (7th generation)

1. Etch
Apply for 15 s, rinse 15 s, gently airdry, while keeping dentin moist.

1. Etch
Apply for 15 s, rinse 15 s, gently airdry while keeping dentin moist.

1. Etch and prime
One application without rinsing, gently
air-dry.

1. Etch, prime, and bond
Apply 1–5 layers without rinsing,
gently air-dry, light-cure.

2. Prime
Apply 1–5 layers, gently air-dry.

2. Prime and bond
Apply 1–5 layers, gently air-dry,
light-cure.

2. Bond
Apply one layer, gently air-dry, light-cure.

3. Bond
Apply one layer, gently air-dry, light-cure.

REPRESENTATIVE PRODUCTS CURRENTLY MARKETED FOR CLINICAL USE
Adper Scotchbond Multi-Purpose
(3M ESPE)
Syntac (Ivoclar Vivadent)
DenTASTIC All-Purpose (Pulpdent)
GLUMA Solid Bond (Heraeus Kulzer)
Optibond FL (Kerr)

DenTASTIC UNO (Pulpdent)
ExciTE F VivaPen
(Ivoclar Vivadent)
iBond Total Etch (Heraeus Kulzer)
One-Step and also One-step Plus
(Bisco)
Prime & Bond NT (Dentsply)

Adper Prompt (3M ESPE)
AdheSE (Ivoclar Vivadent)
All-Bond SE (Bisco)
Clearfil SE Protect Bond (Kuraray)
Nano-Bond (Pentron)
One-Step Plus with/ Tyrian SPE (Bisco)
Peak SE with Universal Bond (Ultradent)

AdheSE Universal (Ivoclar Vivadent)
Adper Easy Bond Self Etch (3M ESPE)
Adper Prompt L-Pop (3M ESPE)
Clearfil S3 Bond (Kuraray)
Futurabond DC (VOCO)
G-Bond (GC), and XENO V (Dentsply)
i-Bond Self Etch (Heraeus Kulzer)

syringe from which it can be expressed onto enamel and dentin.
During placement, it is important to be aware of the risk of air
bubbles being introduced at the interface because the regions with
air pockets will not be etched.

Primers
Dentin etching is highly technique sensitive because the demineralized collagen network readily collapses when dried. Therefore
priming is necessary to maintain an expanded collagen network
while removing residual water to allow for the infiltration of the
hydrophobic adhesive monomer. Primers are solutions containing
hydrophilic (water-loving) monomers dissolved in a solvent, such
as acetone, ethanol, or water. Such monomers exhibit hydrophilic
properties through phosphate, phosphonate, carboxylic acid, alcohol, or ester functional groups (Figure 6-4). For example, 2-hydroxylethyl methacrylate (HEMA) is a widely used primer monomer
because of its high hydrophilicity (resulting from its −OH group)
and solvent-like nature.
It was believed that dentin bonding could be achieved by forming chemical bonds between a primer and either the inorganic or
the organic components of dentin, in particular, the Ca2+ within
the hydroxyapatite mineral phases of dentin. Phosphate and carboxylic groups form chelation bonds with Ca2+ and, therefore, are
expected to form such bonds during dentin priming, as has been
found with carboxylate-based cements (Chapter 7, Glass-Ionomer
Cement) and as illustrated in Figure 6-5, along with a bonding
mechanism by amino-carboxylate functional groups. On the same
molecule, there should be a polymerizable functional group, such
as methacrylate, that can react with the resin adhesive and thereby
form a chemical bond between the adhesive and dentin. This
approach appeared in Hagger’s dentin-bonding system, which
was glycerophosphoric acid dimethacrylate with a typical M–R–X
structure (Figure 6-6, A).
The design of such dentin-bonding agents is based on the successful model of silane coupling agents, as used to bond the inorganic
filler to the matrix resin in composites (see Figure 5-4), to bond porcelain laminate veneers through resin cements to acid-etched enamel,

Phosphate-based bonding agent

Amino-carboxylate-based bonding agent
(NPG-GMA)

Carboxylate-based bonding agent
(PAA)

• Figure 6-5 Chemical bonding mechanisms to hard tooth tissues
through calcium salt formation with monomers having adhesive functional
groups. (Courtesy K-J Söderholm.)

CHAPTER 6

CH3
O
OH

O
H2C

CH3

P

C
O

OH

O

O

C

H2C

O

A

M

R

X

CH3
O
H2C

CH3

O
H2
C

C

CH3

Si
C
H2

C
H2

O
O

CH3

O

B

M

R

X

• Figure 6-6 M–R–X structures of dentin-bonding agents. A, Glycerophosphoric acid dimethacrylate. The chemical adhesion or bonding mechanism of phosphoric acid is shown in Figure 6-5. B, γ-Methacryloxypropyl
trimethoxysilane. The surface interaction or bonding mechanism of the
silane is shown in Figure 5-4.

and to repair fractured porcelain with composites (Chapter 10,
Bonding of Resin to Dental Ceramics). Figure 6-6, B shows
a silane coupling agent presented as an M–R–X structure. X
represents a group capable of chemically reacting with siliceous
materials such as glass and silicate filler particles in composites,
porcelain crowns and veneers, and/or the calcium ions (Ca2+)
in dental hard tissues. R is a spacer group that provides flexibility and mobility, and thus enhanced reactivity, for the M
group after the X group has been immobilized by reaction at
a surface. M represents an unsaturated methacrylate group or
groups capable of copolymerizing with the other monomers of
a resin cement or composite and thereby forming a chemical
bond between the adhesive and dentin. Several compounds that
are believed to possess these properties are shown in Figure 6-4:
NPG-GMA (a condensation product of N-phenyl glycine and
glycidyl methacrylate and the first-generation dentin-bonding
agent), polymerizable phosphates (e.g., 2-[methacryloyloxyethyl]
phenyl hydrogen phosphate [phenyl-P] and 10-methacryloyloxydecyl dihydrogen phosphate [10-MDP]), and carboxylate compounds (e.g., 4-methacryloyloxyethyl trimellitic
acid [4-MET], 11-methacryloyloxy-1,1′-undecanedicarboxylic
acid [MAC-10], and 4-methacryloyloxyethyl trimellitic anhydride [4-META]). A number of phosphonic acid acrylates
and bis(acrylamide), which are resistant to water degradation (hydrolysis), form a more durable, longer-lasting bond
(e.g., AdheSE Primer; see Table 6-1). Also in this category are
poly(alkenoic) acids as used in carboxylate and glass-ionomer
cements, which are discussed later in this chapter and in more
detail in Chapter 7, Glass-Ionomer Cement.
Primer mixtures have a wide pH range because of the acidity
of various functional monomers incorporated to promote bonding to the tooth structure. The rank of functional groups in their
acidity is as follows: sulfonic acid > phosphonic > phosphoric >

Bonding and Bonding Agents

121

carboxylic > alcohol. If the concentration of acidic monomers is
increased in a HEMA base, a primer formulation may reach a pH
(e.g., 1–2) low enough to remove smear layers and etch underlying
dentin. If a primer has the ability to both etch and prime, it is categorized as a self-etching primer. For this purpose, acidic monomers
are frequently used to formulate self-etching primers. Representatives of these are shown in Figure 6-4: HEMA-phosphate, phenyl-P,
10-MDP, 4-MET, 4-META, and MAC-10.
In spite of theoretical evidence that chemical bonding to tooth
structure is possible, no convincing experimental evidence has yet
been validated to prove that significant chemical bonding occurs
between dentin adhesives and tooth structure under intraoral conditions. Rather, the adhesive functional groups facilitate surface
cleaning and etching and the development of micromechanical
interlocking and monomer penetration of dentin to form a hybrid
layer of molecular entanglements between collagen and polymer,
as described previously.

Solvents
Solvents also play important roles in priming systems. The most
commonly used solvents are water, ethanol, and acetone. In addition to enhancing the wetting of hydrophilic dentin, each solvent
is chosen to make a specific contribution to improve bond adhesion. Water can ionize acidic monomers as well as re-expand the
collapsed collagen network and make a hybrid layer possible. Ethanol and acetone have better miscibility with relatively hydrophobic monomers, and their “water-chasing” ability facilitates water
removal. Removing solvent before proceeding to the next step is
critical for a durable bond.
Adhesives
For dentin bonding, the primary purpose of adhesives is to fill the
interfibrillar space of the collagen network, creating a hybrid layer
with resin tags to provide micromechanical retention upon polymerization and serve as an intermediary bonding to the restorative
materials made of hydrophobic resins. This function is similar to
the role of enamel-bonding agents as an intermediate layer between
the etched enamel and the resin-based restorative material. Likewise, the adhesive layers of a dentin-bonding system should also
prevent fluid leakage along the restorative material’s margin.
It is evident that adhesives need to be hydrophobic so that oral
fluids will be repelled and not permeate through the intermediate
layer. At the same time, adhesives require a certain hydrophilicity
to diffuse into the hydrophilic primer-wetted dentin. To achieve
these two conflicting requirements, adhesive resins are typically
composed mainly of hydrophobic dimethacrylates, such as bisGMA, TEGDMA, and urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA), and a
small amount of a hydrophilic monomer such as HEMA. Monomers with phosphonic acid and methacrylamide functional groups
could be added to improve resistance to hydrolytic degradation
of the adhesives; however, the focus has mostly been on improving hydrolytic degradation of the one-step self-etching adhesives,
which are discussed later.
Initiators
Similar initiator systems are used in both adhesives and restorative
composites (Chapter 5, Classification by Curing Method). Polymerization can be initiated either through a photoinitiator system
consisting of a photosensitizer (e.g., camphorquinone) and a coinitiator (e.g., tertiary amine), a self-cure system that includes a
chemical initiator (e.g., benzoyl peroxide), or a dual-cure initiator
system.

122

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Etch and rinse adhesives

Three-step
(4th-generation)

Self-etch adhesives

Two-step
(6th-generation)
Conditioner

Primer

Self-etching primer

Adhesive resin

Two-step
(5th-generation)

or

One-step
(7th-generation)
Conditioner

Combined primeradhesive resin

Adhesive resin

Self-etching primer/
adhesive
two components

Self-etching adhesive
one component

• Figure 6-7 Classification of current adhesive systems according to van Meerbeek et al. (2003).
(Adapted from Cardoso MV, et al: Current aspects on bonding effectiveness and stability in adhesive
dentistry, Aust Dent J 56[S1]:31–44, 2011.)

Filler Particles
Nanometer-sized silica particles have been added to some adhesives to reinforce the adhesive and thereby produce higher bond
strengths. However, the strengthening effect of the fillers in
adhesives is uncertain because it is not clear whether these fillers
can actually penetrate into the demineralized collagen networks
because the interfibrillar space of the collagen networks is within
the range of 20 nanometers (nm), whereas the nano-sized reinforcing filler particles are in the 40-nm range. The other reason for
the addition of fillers is to effectively modify adhesive viscosity to
a thicker, pastier consistency. When such an adhesive is applied to
an etched dental surface, it yields a thicker bonding layer that can
promote increased bond strength by preventing oxygen inhibition. Moreover, a thick adhesive layer can reduce shrinkage stress
because it is more compliant, which relieves shrinkage-induced
stresses, compared with restorative composites (Chapter 5, Function of Fillers).
Other Ingredients
Additional ingredients are used with dentin-bonding agents for a
variety of specific purposes. Examples include the following: glutaraldehyde (Probond, Dentsply, York, PA) is added as a desensitizer. The monomers 12-methacryloyloxydodecylpyridinium
bromide (MDPB; Clearfil Protect Bond, Kuraray America, New
York, NY) and paraben (Adper Prompt L-Pop, 3M ESPE, St.
Paul, MN) are used as antimicrobials. Fluoride (Prime & Bond
NT, Dentsply, York, PA) is added to prevent secondary caries.
Benzalkonium chloride (e.g., Etch 37, Bisco, Schaumburg, IL)
and chlorhexidine (e.g., Peak LC Bond Resin, Ultradent Products,
South Jordon, UT) are used to prevent collagen degradation. In
laboratory studies, both benzalkonium chloride and chlorhexidine
have been shown to prevent protease enzymes (matrix metalloprotease enzymes or proteins [MMPs]) from being activated and
subsequently denaturing the hybrid-layer collagen. Unfortunately,
however, clinical studies have failed to show improved dentinbond durability after treatment with these agents.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are dentin-bond-strength values so variable?

Properties of Bonding Agents
Bonding systems are often characterized by their bond strength
to the intended substrates, the ability to provide a sealed tooth/
restoration interface, and resistance to hydrolytic degradation.
Hydrophilic monomers are incorporated into the system to
improve bonding to the moist tooth structures.

Measurement of Bond Strength
Evaluation of the efficacy of dentin adhesives is generally based on
the bond strength as determined by loading bonded test specimens
in shear or in tension until fracture occurs. Such tests offer only
indirect evidence of how the adhesive is likely to perform in vivo.
Data published on bond strength for a given material often vary
widely, with high standard deviations. This wide variance is better
described by the coefficient of variation (standard deviation/mean)
and is attributed to the inherent variations at the dentin surface,
such as water content, the presence or absence of a smear layer,
dentin permeability, orientation of the tubules relative to the surface, and differences in the in vitro test design and stress distribution adjacent to the interface. Although there is no agreement on
the minimum strength necessary to provide successful bonding,
20 MPa or higher has been proposed as a reasonable goal.
Current dentin-bonding agents can have bond strengths high
enough to shift the site of clinical failure from the interface to within
the dentin adjacent to the restoration or, in some cases, within the
restoration adjacent to the interface. Thus it is clear that the inherent
bond strength is no longer the limitation in the effectiveness of bonded
restorations. The limiting factor now appears to be, at least for large
restorations, induced stresses generated during curing shrinkage within
the resin-based composite itself. Several products with reduced interfacial polymerization stress have recently been introduced (Chapter 5,
Low Shrinkage Composites), and means of further stress reduction are
currently under investigation and should eventually eliminate this as a
significant clinical problem.
Measurement of Microleakage
The degree of microleakage at the restoration–tooth interface can
be monitored by the penetration of tracers and staining agents. As
is true for bond strength testing, there is also a large variation in

CHAPTER 6

leakage data, depending on the measurement technique and the
manipulation during placement. Often, a good correlation does not
exist between bond strength and microleakage. However, the newer
low-stress products appear to be superior in inhibiting interfacial
leakage between the conditioned tooth structure and adhesive resin.

Aging Effects and Degradation of the Hybrid Layer
The change of bond strength over time is a useful indication of
clinical lifetime and can be evaluated by in vitro accelerated aging
tests. Several investigations have found that the bond strength of
three-step adhesive systems show little or no decrease in contrast to
two-step adhesive systems that decrease significantly during a 4- to
5-year span. Research has also shown that peripheral bonding to
etched enamel, which seals the resin bond from exposure to water,
can significantly increase bond durability. Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) observations have shown that collagen fibrils
in the hybrid layer degrade coincidently with decreasing bond
strength, suggesting that hybrid-layer degradation contributes to
aging of dentin-bond integrity. As indicated in the earlier subsection on “other” bonding agent ingredients, this is likely caused by
the activation of MMPs, which denature the hybrid-layer collagen.
Some in vitro studies offer a degree of predictability for certain clinical situations. For example, a durable dentin bond can
be expected if enamel bonding is used to seal all cavity margins.
Another requirement for achieving lasting intraoral bonds is
hydrolytic stability (resistance to chemical degradation by water).
Enamel and dentin are hydrated, hydrophilic, and permeable to
water. Even if an enamel or dentin surface is initially dried before
applying an adhesive, inadvertent contamination and diffusion
can easily result in water becoming strongly bound to both the
hard tissue and the adhesive. Thus for an adhesive monomer to
wet hard tooth tissue as well as form a durable bond in the moist
environment of the mouth, it must be both hydrophilic for water
compatibility and hydrolytically stable to ensure longevity.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Do bonding agents perform the same in bonding to enamel and dentin?

Classifications by Clinical Steps
When discussing dentin-bonding agents, it has become customary to describe the generations (first generation, second generation,
etc.) of bonding agents that have led sequentially from the earliest,
relatively ineffective materials to the current materials, which provide reliable functional bonds. This organization into generations of
bonding agents is a somewhat artificial device to mark key advances
in materials and techniques along a more-or-less continuous developmental pathway. Therefore this chapter uses a more logical and
straightforward classification for contemporary adhesive systems
based, rather, on their strategy of adhesion and the number of clinical steps involved. This classification was developed by van Meerbeek
et al. As shown in Figure 6-7 and Table 6-1, it is based on two general
approaches to etching, priming, and applying the bonding resin to
dentin and enamel surfaces and further subdivided into the number
of steps in the process. Thus the major categories of bonding systems
are known as etch-and-rinse and self-etch systems, with two subcategories, each according to the number of clinical steps involved.

Etch-and-Rinse Adhesives
Three Step (Fourth Generation)

The long-established, highly reliable method in this category consists
of three steps: (1) an acid-etchant application, (2) application of the

Bonding and Bonding Agents

123

primer, and (3) application of the bonding resin. The primer contains
hydrophilic functional monomers dissolved in an organic solvent
such as acetone or ethanol, or water. The third step is the application
of a hydrophobic resin, as mentioned earlier in the chapter.
Two Step (Fifth Generation)

A simplified method in this category combines the primer and
adhesive resin into one application. This etch-and-rinse strategy
is the most effective to achieve efficient and stable bonding to
enamel. Etching, usually with a 30% to 40% phosphoric gel that
is rinsed away, promotes the dissolution of enamel rods, creating porosities that are filled by a bonding resin through capillary
action, and then followed by resin polymerization.
With dentin, bonding is more difficult and less predictable
than with enamel because of the organic characteristics of dentin.
In this case, phosphoric acid treatment exposes a collagen network
that is nearly devoid of hydroxyapatite. Bonding occurs by diffusion and infiltration of the resin within the collagen mesh, forming
a hybrid layer. After in situ polymerization, this hybrid layer provides micromechanical retention to the restoration. As explained
earlier, true chemical-adhesive bonding is unlikely to contribute
to bond strength because the monomers have only a weak affinity
for collagen. Further, in the two-step category, hydrophilic and
ionic monomers are combined, with the result that the bonded
interface does not develop an all-hydrophobic resin layer, thus
leaving the bond susceptible to water penetration and subsequent
degradation, which greatly reduces bond durability.

Self-Etch Adhesives
Two Step (Sixth Generation)

This approach does not involve a separate etching step. In this
case, an acidic monomer, which is not rinsed, is used to condition and prime at the same time. There are two types of self-etch
adhesive: mild and strong. Strong self-etch adhesives have a low
pH (<1) and have a bonding mechanism that resembles that of the
etch-and-rinse adhesives. Mild self-etch adhesives (pH = 2) only
partially dissolve the dentin surface, so a substantial amount of
hydroxyapatite remains available within the hybrid layer. Specific
carboxyl or phosphate groups of functional monomers can then
chemically interact with this residual hydroxyapatite. Because this
layer has some mineral content, the bond to dentin is better than
that of etch-and-rinse adhesives. However, this interfacial zone
can be more prone to hydrolytic degradation because the structure is more hydrophilic and thus subject to water intrusion. The
dentin-bond durability of mild self-etch primer systems seems to
be adequate.
One Step (Seventh Generation)

The simplified method in this category combines a dentin conditioner, primer, and bonding resin into a single step. Most onestep or “all-in-one” systems are delivered by a bottle, vial, or
single-unit dose applicator, which is formulated as a single component. However, Adper Prompt L-Pop (Table 6-1) is a variation
on this theme, in which two liquid components are packaged
in separate “blister” compartments in a single dispenser. Bursting one blister causes the two components to blend and form
a single component, which is then applied immediately using a
brush that forms the handle of the blister pack. This version of
one-step, two-component, self-etching primer–adhesive is illustrated in Figure 6-7.
One-step self-etch adhesives are an attractive approach for clinicians because of the reduced and less complex number of clinical
steps required compared with multistep etch-and-rinse adhesives.

124

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

There is no need for rinsing or drying of the tooth structure
because of the lack of an etch step. Because of this, numerous selfetch adhesive bonding agents have been introduced that expand
this category for use with total-etch procedures (Adper Easy
Bond Self-Etch; Table 6-1). These recently developed products
have shown durability and versatility for use in an array of clinical applications. New phosphonic acid ether acrylates and crosslinking bis(acrylamide)s facilitate the preparation of self-etching
enamel–dentin adhesives with improved storage stability.
Products in the one-step, self-etch category have undergone limited clinical experience but are showing comparable performance
and durability to two-step self-etch and etch-and-rinse products.
These four categories are described in Table 6-1, which also
provides typical application instructions and examples of representative commercial products for each category. Over the last several
years, the availability of one-step products has been increasing,
and they are replacing earlier versions in the three-step and twostep categories.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Can a single luting agent be used for cementation of indirect restorations in
all clinical scenarios?

Luting Agents
For many years, retention of indirect restorations could only be
attained by the use of favorable tooth preparations and by micromechanical interlocking into irregularities present on the surface
of the restoration and the tooth, without adhesive bonding, as
discussed in this chapter. This type of material is known as a luting agent. The most notable materials in this category are zinc
phosphate and zinc oxide–eugenol (ZOE) cements (Chapter 7,
Zinc Oxide-Based Cements). These lack adhesion and chemical bond formation with tooth structure and, thus, exhibit low
bond strength to dentin. The introduction of adhesive bonding
to enamel and dentin completely changed the procedure of affixing indirect restorations. A number of adhesive bonding materials are available for bonding prostheses, including polycarboxylate
cements, glass-ionomer cements, resin-modified glass-ionomer
(RMGI) cements, and resin cements, which are described in more
detail in this section and in Chapter 7, Combination Cements.
Traditionally, the terms luting and cementing refer to the use of
nonadhesive materials for retaining prostheses, whereas bonding
refers to the use of adhesive bonding materials. The distinction
has faded in the literature; the use of adhesive bonding medium is
also called luting. This section will concentrate on their bonding
mechanism and recent developments in adhesive bonding agents.
Resin cements are low-viscosity resin-based composites that can
bond to various substrates, including tooth structure, resin composites, metal alloys, porcelain, and other ceramics. For cementation
of indirect restorations, where most of the tooth structure is dentin, resin cements have shown better mechanical properties compared with others, such as zinc phosphate cement. Resin cements
can follow the application of dentin-bonding agents, or not, when
bonding to tooth structure. The former can be considered either as
an etch-and-rinse adhesive resin cement or as a self-etch adhesive
resin cement, according to its bonding-agent system. The latter is
a self-adhesive resin cement. In vitro studies have reported better
enamel-bonding performance for non–self-adhesive resin cements
compared with self-adhesive cements. Self-adhesive resin cements

do not show significant infiltration into dentin, but apparently
some type of chemical interaction occurs between the calcium
in hydroxyapatite and the cement monomer functional groups.
For cementation of all-ceramic restorations, resin cement is the
material of choice. Preparation of an all-ceramic restoration can
include, but is not limited to, sandblasting, application of hydrofluoric acid for etching, silanization, or application of a ceramic
primer to improve bond strength. Bonding to ceramic substrates
is discussed in Chapter 10, Bonding of Resin to Dental Ceramics.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are glass-ionomer cements also used as restorative material for class V
erosion lesions?

When an acid-soluble calcium alumino-fluorosilicate glass powder is mixed with an aqueous solution of polyacrylic acid or analogous polyacid (also known as ionomers), Ca2+ and Al3+ ions released
from the powder react with the carboxylic acid (−COOH) of polyacids and crosslink polyacid to form a solid. The solid is known as
GIC and can be used to make restorations. The surface of a freshly
mixed GIC should appear wet and rich in carboxylic acids. These
carboxylic groups will interact strongly with surface Ca2+ ions in
enamel or dentin, resulting in chemical adhesion to tooth structure
as the GIC sets. This chemical adhesion may also be beneficial in
terms of resistance to hydrolytic degradation. This behavior qualifies GIC as a self-adhesive cementing medium and restoration.
A short treatment with polyacrylic acid can clean the tooth surface
and remove the smear layer, exposing collagen fibrils to a depth of
about 0.5 to 1 micron, which improves the micromechanical bonding
of the GIC to dentin surfaces. Most of the current GICs have been
modified with polymerizable acrylate monomers and are referred to
as RMGIs. They contain a light-curable acrylic resin that provides for
rapid polymerization at and near the surface, and they bond using the
same bonding mechanisms as nonresin glass ionomers.
Clinical longevity depends not just on bond strength but also
on dislodging forces. Composite restoratives undergo significant polymerization shrinkage (Chapter 5, Cure Shrinkage and
Managing Shrinkage Stress), which creates stresses adjacent to
the resin–dentin interface that can rupture dentinal bonds in all
but the smallest restorations. Because glass ionomers generate low
stresses on setting, they are well retained even in areas such as class
V sites, where occlusal forces induce relatively little stress. They
also have been used with somewhat limited success as pit and fissure sealants. However, because of the high stresses induced by
intraoral forces in occlusal areas, a greater degree of dislodgment
and fracture of the GIC sealants occurs in these sites. GICs are
described in some detail in Chapter 7, Glass-Ionomer Cement.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are self-adhesive cements currently not used to bond orthodontic
brackets?

Applications in Orthodontic, Endodontic,
and Preventive Dentistry
The procedures of acid-etching and adhesive bonding that provide
a strong, durable bond between resin and tooth structure have
also been the basis for dental procedures as diverse as orthodontic
bracket bonding, endodontic sealers, amalgam bonding, and pit

CHAPTER 6

and fissure sealants. Additional applications in the bonding of prostheses, porcelain laminate veneer bonding, and adhesive cements,
including glass-ionomer restorative materials, will also be discussed
in greater detail throughout the book but with particular emphasis
in the chapters on composites, cements, amalgams, and ceramics.

Bonding Resins for Orthodontic Brackets
Orthodontic treatment with fixed appliances involves brackets and
bands. Bands are flat metal bands that encircle teeth and are usually
used on molars. Brackets are welded to bands or bonded to enamel
and hold the wires that apply forces for tooth alignment. The
development of bonding has contributed to a decrease in banding,
even in posterior teeth. Various luting agents have been used in
orthodontics, such as polycarboxylate cement, GIC, and RMGI
cements. Contemporary bonding to enamel involves the following:
1. Prophylaxis of bonding surface
2. Etching with phosphoric acid gel or aqueous solutions
3. Rinsing with water
4. Drying with air
5. Application of sealant or primer
6. Bonding of brackets with resin cement
7. Light-curing the dual-cured or light-cured cement
Manufacturers do not recommend self-adhesive cements as luting agents for orthodontic fixed appliances. Self-adhesive cements
have lower bond strengths to intact enamel in comparison with
conventional orthodontic resin cements that require etching
with phosphoric acid. However, self-etching systems have shown
acceptable results for the bonding of orthodontic brackets.
In orthodontic treatment, bonding involves mainly enamel.
Increasingly, adults are undergoing tooth alignment. This population has more amalgam restorations, porcelain-fused-to-metal
(PFM) crowns, and all-ceramic crowns. Therefore bonding of
brackets to those surfaces also plays an important role in orthodontic treatment. It is important that the bonding of brackets
be reliable because replacing loose brackets is time-consuming
and costly.
Several types of surface treatments can be used with restorative
materials to increase bond strength. For example, roughening with
a diamond bur and sandblasting enhance bonding, especially in
the case of metals. These treatments create surface irregularities and
increased surface area. This promotes micromechanical retention
and chemical adhesion in the case of resins, such as those containing
4-META, 10-MDP, and others, as shown in Figure 6-4. The bond
strength of brackets bonded to amalgam (see following discussion) is
lower than that to etched enamel. In addition to forming a reliable
bond, the ability of a resin to reduce or prevent demineralization
(“white spot” caries) in the difficult-to-clean areas around orthodontic brackets and bands and to reduce damage to enamel during treatment are also important properties in this clinical scenario.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the materials and techniques needed to overcome the root canal
system environment and create a hermetic seal with endodontic obturation
systems?

Endodontic Sealers
Endodontic sealers are used in conjunction with a solid or semisolid
core material to fill voids and seal root canals during obturation.
These sealers, sometimes called cements, should fill and promote

Bonding and Bonding Agents

125

a close seal between the core and the dentinal walls of the canal,
preventing or minimizing leakage, entombing residual microorganisms, and preferably filling inaccessible areas of the root canal
system. Sealer selection may influence the outcome of endodontic
treatment. Historically, gutta-percha (a natural, malleable rubber
related to latex) has been and continues to be used as the solid core
material in combination with ZOE or calcium hydroxide cement,
or an epoxy-based sealer. GIC and resin-modified GIC are also
used as root canal sealers. These can chemically bond to root canal
dentin but not to gutta-percha. There has been a surge of development in endodontic obturation materials to produce, via adhesive
mechanisms, a sequence of bonded interfaces from dentin to sealer
to the core obturation material and from the coronal to apical
aspects of the canal space, including anastomoses, canal fins, culde-sacs, and isthmuses. These new developments will be discussed
in Chapter 7, Endodontic Sealers.
The configuration of the root canal presents an unfavorable “C-factor” for these resin-based materials. C-factors can be
extremely high, over 1000, for the canal configuration. Thus a
resin endodontic sealer is subjected to severe polymerization
shrinkage stresses during setting, which may cause debonding
and gap formation along the periphery of the root canal obturation and adhesive interfaces. Gaps can form between the sealer
and dentin wall or in between the solid core material (e.g., guttapercha) and the sealer. Therefore root canal obturation inherently
requires a number of different materials and involves multiple
interfaces, thereby creating a greater challenge than most other
applications of adhesive dentistry.
In a long, narrow space such as the root canal, the application of self-etching adhesives or any other bonding system
becomes challenging and might not be uniform throughout the
entire interface. Therefore, if resin infiltration into demineralized dentin and hybrid formation is not adequate to prevent
movement of fluids inward through dentin, over time, the
bond will be compromised, and the seal will fail. In addition,
in bonding systems that contain volatile solvents, evaporation
might be hindered. The canal anatomy is not only problematic
to adhesive root canal obturation but also for the bonding of
prefabricated posts.
A further problem is that some irrigating solutions (e.g.,
sodium hypochlorite, NaOCl) and intracanal medicaments can
also have adverse effects on root canal dentin collagen and, consequently, on the longevity of endodontic bonding. In vitro studies
have reported that NaOCl has deleterious effects on dentin collagen and is both concentration and time dependent. Destruction of the collagen matrix in mineralized tissues results in a less
tough, more brittle substrate that might precipitate fatigue crack
propagation during cyclic stresses. This might increase the susceptibility of the root-treated teeth to posttreatment crown or
root fracture.
The results of a 2001 in vitro study indicate that root
canals treated with 5% NaOCl have significantly lower bond
strengths of C&B Metabond cement (Parkell, Inc., Edgewood, NY) to dentin. However, it is important to note that
the effects of endodontic irrigation on the bonding of resin
cement to radicular dentin are dependent on the dentinbonding system used.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does amalgam bonding to dentin differ from composite bonding to
dentin?

126

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Sealed fissure

• Figure 6-8 Schematic of a tooth cross section, illustrating penetration
of a sealant into an occlusal fissure.

Amalgam Bonding
Mechanical retention and resistance forms continue to be used
for amalgam restorations (Chapter 8, Clinical Performance of
Amalgam Restorations). However, adhesive bonding methods for
retaining and sealing amalgam restorations with dentin bonding
to reduce microleakage and increase fracture resistance have also
been investigated. Bonding agents employing M–R–X-type adhesive monomers such as 4-META (Parkell Inc., Edgewood, NY;
Figure 6-4) have achieved some degree of success, but the mechanism for bonding amalgam to resin is predominantly mechanical. It is established during condensation of the amalgam into the
viscous chemical-curing resin adhesive layer, producing macromechanical interlocking after polymerization. Thicker adhesive layers or interfaces have been shown to promote greater retention
under certain conditions. For example, Amalgambond Plus with
4-META contains polymethylmethacrylate and forms a thick,
viscous layer. Studies have shown that amalgam adhesive bond
strength ranges from 6 to 15 MPa.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Can sealants prevent secondary caries progression when placed over
underlying carious enamel or dentin?

Pit and Fissure Sealants
Various materials and techniques have been advocated for preventing caries in the susceptible pit and fissure areas of posterior
teeth. The most widely used sealant techniques make use of resin
systems that can penetrate into the pits and fissures and seal
them against oral bacteria and acid demineralization. A cross
section of a tooth with a pit and fissure sealant is shown schematically in Figure 6-8.
Several types of resins, both filled and unfilled, have been
employed as pit and fissure sealants. The commercially available
products have been based on either the UDMA or bis-GMA
monomers (Figure 6-4) that may be polymerized by either the

Selected Readings
Bedran-Russo A, Leme-Kraus AA, Vidal CMP, et al: An overview of dental adhesive systems and the dynamic tooth–adhesive interface, Dent
Clin N Am 61:713–731, 2017.

amine-benzoyl peroxide chemical activation–initiation system or
by light activation, as discussed in Chapter 5, Classification by
Curing Method. The unfilled resins are available as colorless or
tinted transparent materials. The filled resins are translucent and
available either as tooth-colored or white materials.
The success of the sealant technique is highly dependent on
obtaining and maintaining an intimate adaptation of the sealant
to the tooth surface. Therefore the sealants must be of relatively
low viscosity so that they will wet the tooth, flow, and penetrate
the pits and fissures. To enhance wetting and mechanical retention of the sealant, the tooth surface is first conditioned by acidetching, rinsed, and dried thoroughly, as described previously. The
physical properties of the sealants are closer to those of unfilled
direct resins than to those of resin-based composites.
The reduction in occlusal caries resulting from the careful use
of pit and fissure sealants has been impressive. Consequently, the
American Dental Association, the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, the American Society of Dentistry for Children,
and the American Association of Public Health Dentistry have all
endorsed the use of sealants as an effective therapy. Clinical studies have shown that the failure frequency of sealants is approximately 5% per year after a single application. In an early report,
after 10 years, 78% of first permanent molars were free of caries
after a single application of sealant, compared with only 31% of
caries-free teeth in the unsealed matched pairs. Mertz-Fairhurst
et al. found even more dramatic results in a study of sealed class
I composite restorations where carious dentin was not removed.
They showed that the lesions did not progress over a period of
10 years, as long as the sealants remained intact. Clinical trials in
which sealants were intentionally placed in pits and fissures having caries have shown that as long as a sealant is well retained, no
caries progression occurs.
If doubt exists about whether the pit or fissure is free from caries
or not, it is still justified to place a sealant. If a dentist feels uncomfortable about sealing a potentially carious lesion and believes that
a visual inspection of the potential lesion is required, another conservative approach can be taken that consists of minimal cavity
preparation and the placement of an enamel–dentin bonded composite restoration combined with a sealant application. With such
an approach, most of the occlusal surface is sealed. This restoration
is called a preventive-resin restoration (PRR). The PRR treatment has
exhibited a success rate of 75% after 9 years, a remarkably high success rate compared with traditional amalgam treatment.

Acknowledgment
The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. Barry K. Norling, now deceased, for his contributions to the earlier editions of this chapter
and Dr. Danna Mota Moreira, Faculty of Dentistry, Unichristus,
Fortaleza, Brazil, for reviewing and adding important sections to
this chapter.

Betancourt DE, Baldion PA, Castellanos JE. Resin-dentin bonding interface: Mechanisms of degradation and strategies for stabilization of the
hybrid layer, Int J Biomater 2019: 1–11, 2019.
Buonocore MG: The Use of Adhesives in Dentistry, Springfield, IL, 1975,
Charles C Thomas.

CHAPTER 6

In this book, Buonocore, the developer of the acid-etch technique,
identified potential problems associated with the use of adhesives in
dentistry that are still germane to current systems, for example, dentin
bonding agents.
De Munck J, van Landuyt KL, Peumans M, et al: A critical review of the
durability of adhesion to tooth tissue: Methods and results, J Dent Res
84:118–132, 2005.
This review examines the fundamental processes that cause the adhesion of biomaterials to enamel and dentin to degrade over time. This
paper critically appraises methodologies that focus on chemical degradation patterns of hydrolysis and elution of interface components,
as well as mechanically oriented test setups, such as those designed for
fatigue and fracture toughness measurements.
Moreira DM, Almeida JFA, Ferraz CCR, et al: Structural analysis of
bovine root dentin after use of different endodontics auxiliary chemical substances, J Endod 35:1023–1027, 2009.
Moretto SG, Russo EMA, Carvalho RCR, et al: MV. 3-year clinical effectiveness of one-step adhesives in non-carious cervical lesions, J Dent
41:675–682, 2013.

Bonding and Bonding Agents

127

Pashley DH, Tay FR, Carvalho RM, et al: From dry bonding to waterwet bonding to ethanol-wet bonding, Am J Dent 20:7–20, 2007.
A review of the interactions between dentin matrix and solvated resins
using a macromodel of the hybrid layer.
Peutzfeldt A, Sahafi A, Flury S: Bonding of restorative materials to dentin
with various luting agents, Oper Dent 36:266–273, 2011.
Simonsen RJ, Neal RJ: A review of the clinical application and performance of pit and fissure sealants, Aust Dent J 56(Suppl 1):45–58, 2011.
This paper focuses on the clinical aspects of pit and fissure sealant
application and the most recent publications that support an evidence-based clinical application technique.
van Meerbeek B, Yoshihara K, Yoshida Y, et al: State of the art of self-etch
adhesives, Dent Mater 27:17–28, 2011.
An overview of the types of adhesive systems and application strategies
in use as of 2011.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Useful Websites
Adept Institute: http://adeptinstitute.com/members/000_source/membership
/list.php?view=3&title=Bonding+%28Direct+Resin%29.
Air Force Dental: https://www.airforcemedicine.af.mil/DECS/.
The Biomaterials Network: http://biomat.net/site2/tag/biomaterials/.
Clinical guidelines for photocuring restorative resins: http://www.faqs
.org/abstracts/Health/Clinical-guidelines-for-photocuring-restorative
-resins-Assessing-the-effect-of-extraneous-light-on-p.html.
Dental Compare: http://www.dentalcompare.com/.
Literature Citations
Asmussen E, Munksgaard EC: Bonding of restorative resins to dentine:
Status of dentine adhesives and impact on cavity design and filling
techniques, Int Dent J 38:97–104, 1988.
The chemistry of dentin bonding agents is described, and bond
strength data are presented. Also, factors involved in clinical usage
that influence retention are cited.
Bedran-Russo A, Leme-Kraus AA, Vidal CMP, et al: An overview of
dental adhesive systems and the dynamic tooth–adhesive interface, Dent Clin N Am 61:713–731, 2017.
Betancourt DE, Baldion PA, Castellanos JE: Resin-dentin bonding interface: Mechanisms of degradation and strategies for stabilization of the hybrid layer, Int J Biomater 2019:1–11, 2019.
doi:10.1155/2019/5268342.
Bowen RL, Eichmiller FC, Marjenhoff WA, et al: Adhesive bonding of
composites, J Am Coll Dent 56:10–13, 1989.
This article discusses the merits of several of the popular dentin and
enamel bonding systems, noting differences in chemical components
and instructions for use.
Buonocore MG: A simple method of increasing the adhesion of acrylic
filling materials to enamel surfaces, J Dent Res 34:849–853, 1955.
In this paper, published approximately 50 y ago, Buonocore
suggested that etching enamel would improve mechanical bonding of an unfilled resin (composites were nonexistent at that time).
The technique is now an essential step in the use of all modern
composites.
Buonocore MG: The Use of Adhesives in Dentistry, Springfield, IL
1975, Charles C Thomas.
In this book, Buonocore, the developer of the acid-etch technique,
identified potential problems associated with the use of adhesives in
dentistry that are still germane to current systems, for example, dentin
bonding agents.
Cardoso MV, de Almeida Neves A, Mine A, et al: Current aspects on
bonding effectiveness and stability in adhesive dentistry, Aust Dent J
56(Suppl 1):31–44, 2011.
De Munck J, van Landuyt KL, Peumans M, et al: A critical review of
the durability of adhesion to tooth tissue: Methods and results,
J Dent Res 84:118–132, 2005.
This review examines the fundamental processes that cause the adhesion of biomaterials to enamel and dentin to degrade over time. This
paper critically appraises methodologies that focus on chemical degradation patterns of hydrolysis and elution of interface components,
as well as mechanically oriented test setups, such as those designed for
fatigue and fracture toughness measurements.
Douglas WH: Clinical status of dentine bonding agents, J Dent 17:209–
215, 1989.
An excellent review of the evolution of earlier dentin bonding
agents, the problems associated with adhesion, and the clinical
criteria involved in phenomena, such as microleakage and tooth
strengthening.
Fusayama T, Nakamura M, Kurosaki M, et al: Nonpressure adhesion of a
new adhesive restorative resin, J Dent Res 58:1364–1370, 1979.
A breakthrough in dentin bonding was demonstrated when acid etching of dentin was reported to increase retention of restorations but
with no increase in pulpal trauma.

Giannini M, Makishi P, Ayres APA, et al: Self-etch adhesive systems:
A literature review, Braz Dent J 26:3–10, 2015. doi:10.1590/01036440201302442 .
Glantz P: On wettability and adhesiveness, Odont Rev 20(Suppl 17):5–
124, 1969.
The first in a series of publications by this author suggesting that the
use of topical fluorides provides an additional mechanism involved in
reduction of dental caries, that is, lowering of the surface energy of tooth
structure, thereby reducing plaque accumulation over a given interval.
Li G-H, Niu L-N, Zhang W, et al: Ability of new obturation materials
to improve the seal of the root canal system – A review, Acta Biomater
10:1050–1063, 2014. doi:10.1016/j.actbio.2013.11.015.
Hayashi M, Takahashi Y, Hirai M, et al: Effect of endodontic irrigation on bonding of resin cement to radicular dentin, Eur J Oral Sci
113:70–76, 2005.
Houpt M, Fuks A, Eidelman E: The preventive resin (composite resin/
sealant) restoration: Nine-year results, Quintessence Int 25:155–159,
1994.
Nine-year data presented to show the efficiency of using preventive
resin restorations (PRRs) to treat pits and fissures with carious lesions.
Ikemura K, Endo T: A review of our development of dental adhesives—
Effects of radical polymerization initiators and adhesive monomers on
adhesion, Dent Mater J 29:109–121, 2010.
The authors present a thorough review of their development of monomers for self-etching and self-adhesive bonding systems, the role of
initiators, and chemical structure–property relationships.
Imazato S: Antibacterial properties of resin composites and dentin bonding systems, Dent Mater 19:449–457, 2003.
This paper reviews the research conducted on the evaluation of antibacterial properties of commercial composites and adhesive systems,
in addition to the discussion of many attempts to achieve antibacterial
composites or adhesives.
Liu Y, Tjäderhane L, Breschi L, et al: Limitations in bonding to dentin
and experimental strategies to prevent bond degradation, J Dent Res
90:953–968, 2011.
Marshall SJ, Bayne SC, Baier R, et al: A review of adhesion science, Dent
Mater 26:11–16, 2010.
Mertz-Fairhurst EJ. Current status of sealant retention and caries prevention, J Dent Edu 48:18–26, 1984.
Ten-year data presented to show a substantial reduction in caries following the placement of sealant compared with untreated control
surfaces.
Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Curtis JW, Ergle JW, et al: Ultraconservative and
cariostatic sealed restorations: Results at year 10, J Am Dent Assoc
129:55–66, 1998.
A classic 10-y study that demonstrates the efficacy of sealed composites in preventing caries progression even when the carious dentin was
not removed.
Moreira DM, Almeida JFA, Ferraz CCR, et al: Structural analysis of
bovine root dentin after use of different endodontics auxiliary
chemical substances, J Endod 35:1023–1027, 2009.
Moretto SG, Russo EMA, Carvalho RCR, et al: MV. 3-year clinical
effectiveness of one-step adhesives in non-carious cervical lesions,
J Dent 41:675–682, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.jdent.2013.05.016.
Nakabayashi N, Kojima K, Masuhara E: Sealants consensus development
conference statement on dental sealants and the prevention of tooth
decay, J Am Dent Assoc 108:233–236, 1984.
Recommendations are made from a consensus conference on the state
of the art of sealant therapy. The data presented were strongly supportive of sealant use.
Neeraj M, Kundabala M, Shashirashmi A: Strategies to overcome polymerization shrinkage − Materials and techniques. A review, Dental Update
37:115–125, 2010. doi:10.12968/denu.2010.37.2.115.
Overton JD, Vance RI: Effect of adhesive volume on the bond strength of
bonded complex amalgam restorations, Am J Dent 18:320–322, 2005.
Pashley DH, Carvalho RM, Sano H, et al: The microtensile bond test: A
review, J Adhes Dent 1:299–309, 1999.

127.e1

A review of the microtensile bond test, which permits true interfacial
bond strength measurement in bonded systems where shear bond tests
yield cohesive dentin failure.
Pashley DH, Tay FR, Carvalho RM, et al: From dry bonding to waterwet bonding to ethanol-wet bonding, Am J Dent 20:7–20, 2007.
A review of the interactions between dentin matrix and solvated resins
using a macromodel of the hybrid layer.
Pedro PC, Souza AMF, Aranha JH, et al: In vitro cytotoxicity and in
vivo biocompatibility of contemporary resin-modified glass-ionomer
cements, Dent Mater 22:838–844, 2006.
Perdigão J: Dentin bonding—variables related to the clinical situation
and the substrate treatment, Dent Mater 26:24–37, 2010.
Peutzfeldt A, Sahafi A, Flury S: Bonding of restorative materials to
dentin with various luting agents, Oper Dent 36:266–273, 2011.
Phillips RW, Ryge G (editors): Proceedings on Adhesive Restorative Dental
Materials, Spencer, IN, 1961, Owen Litho Service.
These historical transactions resulted from the first workshop on the
problems of, and potential solutions to, the development of adhesive dental materials. The recommendations for critically important
areas of research provided impetus for subsequent investigations in
this area.
Powers JM, O’Keefe KL: Update on seventh-generation bonding agents,
Inside Dentistry 5:52–56, 2009.
Schwartz RS, Fransman R: Adhesive dentistry and endodontics: Materials, clinical strategies and procedures for restoration of access cavities:
A review, J Endod 31:151–165, 2005.
Simonsen RJ, Neal RJ: A review of the clinical application and performance of pit and fissure sealants, Aust Dent J 56(Suppl 1):45–58, 2011.
This paper focuses on the clinical aspects of pit and fissure sealant
application and the most recent publications that support an evidence-based clinical application technique.

127.e2

van Landuyt KL, Peumans M, De Munck J, et al: Three-year clinical performance of a HEMA-free one-step self-etch adhesive in non-carious
cervical lesions, Eur J Oral Sci 119:511–516, 2011.
van Landuyt KL, Snauwaert J, De Munck J, et al: Systematic review of
the chemical composition of contemporary dental adhesives, Biomaterials 28:3757–3785, 2007.
This article systematically reviews the ingredients commonly used in
current dental adhesives as well as the properties of these ingredients.
It also includes an extensive table with the chemical formulation of
contemporary dental adhesives.
van Meerbeek B, Peumans M, Poitevin A, et al: Relationship between
bond-strength tests and clinical outcomes, Dent Mater 26(2):100–121,
2010.
van Meerbeek B, Yoshihara K, Yoshida Y, et al: State of the art of selfetch adhesives, Dent Mater 27:17–28, 2011.
An overview of the types of adhesive systems and application strategies
in use as of 2011.
Vaught RL: Mechanical versus chemical retention for restoring complex
restorations: What is the evidence? J Dent Educ 71:1356–1362, 2007.
Zhang K, Kim YK, Cadenaro M, et al: Effects of different exposure times
and concentrations of sodium hypochlorite/ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid on the structural integrity of mineralized dentin, J Endod
36:105–109, 2010.
Zisman WA: Influence of constitution on adhesion, Ind Eng Chem
55:18–38, 1963.
A pioneer in surface phenomena discusses parameters that influence
wetting and the use of contact angles to screen the potential wetting of
adhesives to selected adherends.

7

Dental Cements
OUTLINE
History of Dental Cements

Cements for Luting

Indications for Dental Cements

Endodontic Sealers

Performance Criteria for Dental Cements

Tri-/Dicalcium Silicate Cement

Solubility and Disintegration of Cements

Calcium Phosphate Cements

Fluoride-Releasing Materials

Summary

Pulp Protection

KEY TERMS
Acid–base reaction Chemical reaction between a compound
containing replaceable hydrogen ions (acid) and a substance
containing replaceable hydroxide ions (base) that yields a salt
and water; for aqueous liquid and powder cements, the liquid is
the acid, and the powder is the base.
Atraumatic restorative treatment (ART) Clinical procedure performed without dental burs, air/water spray, or anesthesia that
consists of manual excavation of cavitated carious tissues and
restoration of the tooth cavity with a fluoride-releasing cement.
Bioactivity Reactive potential of a material to form a layer of
hydroxyapatite-like material on its surface in vivo.
Calcium phosphate cements Cement that is used for bone
regeneration that consists of powder (di-, tri-, or tetra-calcium
phosphates) that is mixed with an aqueous solution from which
hydroxyapatite precipitates.
Cavity liner Material to coat the bottom of a cavity preparation to
protect the pulp; a liner is applied in a thin layer.
Cement Substance that hardens from a viscous state to a solid union
between two surfaces; for dental applications, cements act as a
base, liner, filling material, root canal sealer, or adhesive to bind
devices and prostheses to tooth structure or to each other.
Cement base Material used to protect the pulp in a cavity
preparation by providing thermal insulation and sometimes a
medicament, usually thicker and more distant from the pulp
than a cavity liner.
Cement thickness Distance between an abutment tooth and
cemented prosthesis, influenced by the design of the prosthesis
and the viscosity of the cement during seating.
Compomer A term derived from the terms composite and ionomer; a resin-based composite consisting of a silicate glass filler
phase and a methacrylate-based matrix with carboxylic groups;
also known as polyacid-modified glass-ionomer cement.
Endodontic sealer Material to prevent any transmittance of fluid
or bacteria from the coronal to the apical region, used in conjunction with an obturation material such as gutta-percha.
Film thickness Thickness in μm of a cement 7 min after 150 N
have been applied, which is the International Organization for
128

Standardization (ISO) and American Dental Association (ADA)
method for determining the ability of a cement to spread under
pressure.
Glass-ionomer cement (GIC) Cement that hardens following an
acid–base reaction between fluoroaluminosilicate glass powders and an aqueous-based polyacrylic solution; also known as
polyalkenoate cement.
Hydraulic cement Cement that requires water to cause the material to set.
Luting agent A viscous cement-like material that fills a gap
between two surfaces to prevent dislodgement. The term luting
agent originally referred to nonadhesive agents only but now
also includes adhesive agents.
Maturation Process of aqueous cement strengthening after setting.
Mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) A tri- and di-calcium silicatebased cement used for vital pulp therapy and other endodontic
indications.
Pulp capping A procedure to treat pulp that has been exposed
through caries removal or trauma, by the application of a medicament; indirect pulp capping is the term used when the pulpal
exposure is incipient, such as when dentinal tubules are visible
in the cavity.
Resin cement A resin-based composite material used for attaching fixed prostheses or orthodontic brackets; these cements are
less viscous than resin composite restorative materials.
Resin-modified glass-ionomer cement (hybrid ionomer
cement) Cement that combines a glass powder and an aqueous
solution of polymerizable groups attached to the polyacrylic acid.
Varnish Material applied to the floor of a cavity; a solution of natural gum, synthetic resins, or resins dissolved in volatile solvent,
such as acetone, ether, or chloroform; material applied superficially to a tooth to release fluoride.
Zinc oxide eugenol (ZOE) cement Cement based on the reaction
between zinc oxide and eugenol.
Zinc phosphate cement Substance formed by the reaction between zinc oxide powder and phosphoric acid liquid that can be
used either as a base or as a luting agent.

CHAPTER 7

Naturally occurring waxes and resins have been used since time
immemorial for covering the surface of broken teeth and adhering
replacement materials, including bone, animal teeth, wood, and early
naturally occurring polymers. However, problems arose with many
“natural” materials exposed to the warm, moist, and often acidic
oral environment, leading to their gradual failure in vivo. Modern
dentistry has evolved to achieve improved clinical results, which
include a wide variety of cements created by various chemical reactions. Cements are used for many indications and may be needed for
short-term (days to weeks), intermediate-term (weeks to months),
and long-term (years) retention of dental appliances (devices).

History of Dental Cements
In the 1800s, zinc oxide (ZnO) powder of good purity was found
to react with eugenol at room temperature to form a functional
cement. The ZnO–eugenol material was used as an impression
material and temporary restoration and was eventually found to
be obtundent with the pulp and suitable as a root canal sealer.
Zinc oxide was observed to react with phosphoric acid to yield
a material stronger than ZnO–eugenol, capable of securing gold
alloy restorations to tooth preparations. The high acidity of the
ZnO–phosphate cement was unsuitable for pulpal contact but a
good insulator for use as a base. In the mid-20th century, ZnO
was also used with carboxylic acid to produce a cement that was
lower in acidity and capable of bonding to tooth structure.
When the zinc oxide in zinc phosphate cement was replaced
with a glass powder, a semitranslucent esthetic filling called silicate
cement was created. The longevity of the silicate cement restorations was unimpressive (<4 years) because the silicate cements
have high solubility. Gradually, the silicate cements lost anatomical contour and degraded at the margins. Despite the deficiency,
the occurrence of recurrent caries adjacent to these cements was
rare. Laboratory studies showed that fluoride was released from
the glass in silicate cements. The impressive anticariogenic potential of the silicate cements highlighted the ability of fluoride ions
(F−) to inhibit demineralization.
The lessons learned from silicate cement and zinc carboxylate
cement led to the development of glass-ionomer cements (GICs),
which contained a modified glass for the powder and polyacrylic
acid for the liquid. Incorporating the polymerization technology
of methacrylate resin into the liquid created dual-cured materials: acid–base and polymerization reactions. From this combination, resin-modified glass-ionomer cement (RMGI) evolved.
Replacing the liquid component of RMGI with a water-free acidic
polymerizable monomer created a light-curable single-component
material called compomer, a term derived from the terms composite and ionomer. The goal of these two hybrid materials was to
combine the strength of composite with the fluoride release and
self-adhesion of glass ionomer in one material.
Around the mid-20th century, new attributes for dental cements
were needed for use with gutta-percha points in endodontic therapy. These cements are denoted as endodontic sealers, which must
cure in the moist root canal dentin. Furthermore, endodontic
materials must ensure that oral bacteria cannot percolate through
the root to the periapical bone; otherwise, serious infection persists
or occurs. Esthetics are less important for endodontic cements than
for supragingival indications. Several dental materials were adapted
for endodontic use: zinc oxide–eugenol (ZOE), polyvinyl siloxane, epoxy resins, and hydraulic ceramics (tri-/dicalcium silicate).
In the 1990s, the bioactivity and sealing ability of tri-/dicalcium
silicate cements became recognized and appreciated in dentistry.

Dental Cements

129

This ceramic dental cement is now widely indicated for pulpal and
periradicular contact, including endodontic indications.
Varnish has been used for pulpal protection, especially with
amalgam in a cavity preparation. The use of varnish has declined
with decreased amalgam use. However, surficial varnishes are
popular, especially among pediatric dentists. These varnishes are
placed on enamel to release fluoride to provide protection against
caries and promote remineralization from acids in the oral cavity
with calcium ions. Sealants based on resins are also used superficially on teeth to provide protection against caries.
In the 20th century, varnishes included silver ions, silver
nitrate, and silver diammine fluoride solutions for arresting caries and reducing sensitivity. The hazard with silver compounds is
imparting a black color to the caries, as discussed later.
Most current cements include polymers and ceramic powders.
The remainder of this chapter is organized by general indications: pulp protection and enamel protection, fixed prosthodontic
device cementation, endodontic restoratives, and sealing.

Indications for Dental Cements
Dental cements are classified according to their major component,
as shown in Table 7-1, which includes their general indications.
Several formats are offered for dental cements: powder and liquid, two pastes, or single component. Biocompatibility, durability
for the indication, and safety for the patient and dental practitioner are important general cement attributes, all with a “reasonable” price. Some cements achieve their biocompatibility by
being mildly cytotoxic, whereas others are bioinert or bioactive,
as described later. The biocompatibility of dental cements is discussed in general terms in this chapter. Principles of biocompatibility are discussed in Chapter 17, Biocompatibility.
Other characteristics are designed for a cement’s unique
indications, such as viscosity. For pulpal protection or surficial
tooth sealing, a fluid layer is usually suitable. A medium-viscosity
cement is used for cavity liner or cement-base indications. For
adhering an appliance, a cement must have a sufficiently low viscosity to flow along the interfaces between the tooth tissue and
a restorative. A low-viscosity cement is also needed to enable an
endodontic sealer to fill complex root canal anatomy. Orthodontic bands require a low-viscosity cement, but orthodontic brackets require higher-viscosity cements to keep orthodontic brackets
from drifting before the cement is cured. Base/liner materials
should flow and set within, but not out of, the cavity preparation.
Viscous cements are used for filling perforations, for root-end
filling, or for covering pulps after a pulpotomy. Whether low or
high viscosity, a low-contact-angle material is useful for wetting
the surface of enamel or dentin or a prosthetic device.
Cements must harden (set) within a reasonable time that
depends on the indication, ranging from minutes to days. Strength
requirements vary from a compressive strength of 35 MPa for
pulp capping and base materials to 50 MPa for aqueous cements
for the adhesion of devices. The strength should be appropriate
for the indication and increase during maturation. For instance,
the tri-/dicalcium silicate cements mature over about 1 month.
All cements undergo a chemical reaction in vivo. Varnishes set
by evaporation of the solvent to form a coherent protective layer.
Two-part cements begin setting/hardening when the components are mixed. Single-component polymer-based cements set
through polymerization activated by visible light. Dual-cured
resin cements use both chemical and light-curing mechanisms to
maximize polymerization. The hydraulic bioactive cements set by

130

PA RT I I

TABLE 7-1

Direct Restorative Materials

Overview of Dental Cements

Powder/Liquid Systems
Materials

Powder

Liquid

Reaction Type

Indications

Zinc phosphate

Zinc oxide and magnesium
oxide

Phosphoric acid, water

Acid–base reaction

Cementing metallic fixed
prostheses

Zinc oxide–eugenol

Zinc oxide

Eugenol

Acid–base reaction

Pulp protection, temporary
cement

Zinc oxide–eugenol (EBA
modified)

Zinc oxide

Eugenol, EBA

Acid–base reaction

Pulp protection, temporary
cement

Zinc polycarboxylate

Zinc oxide and magnesium
oxide

Polyacrylic acid, water

Acid–base reaction

Metallic fixed prostheses
short spans or crowns

Glass ionomer

Fluoroaluminosilicate glass

Polyacrylic acid, polybasic
carboxylic acid, water

Acid–base reaction

Cementing crowns (alumina,
zirconia metal), metal posts
and core restoration

Fluoroaluminosilicate glass,
chemical- and/or lightactivated initiator(s)

Polyacrylic acid, water-soluble
methacrylate monomer, water,
activator

Light- or chemical-activated
polymerization and acid–base
reaction

Fluoroaluminosilicate glass,
metallic oxides, sodium
fluoride, chemical- and/or
light-activated initiator(s)

Dimethacrylate/carboxylic
monomers, multiple functional
acrylate monomers, water,
activator for chemical
activation

Polymerization by light- and
chemical-activation and acid–
base reaction

Fluoroaluminosilicate glass,
nonreactive filler, reactive
monomers

Nonreactive filler, methacrylate- Light-activated polymerization
modified polyalkanoic acid,
and acid–base reaction
water-soluble methacrylate
monomer, water

Epoxy

Methenamine, titania, silver

Bisphenol A, epichlorohydrin
resin

Chemical crosslinking
polymerization of epoxide

Root canal sealing

Tri-/dicalcium silicate

Tri-/dicalcium silicate and
radiopaque powder

Water-based liquid

Hydration with liquid

Pulpal protection,
periradicular contact,
endodontic sealing

Base Paste

Catalyst Paste

Reaction Type

Indications

Fluoroaluminosilicate glass,
metallic oxides, sodium
fluoride, chemical- and/or
light-activated initiator(s)

Dimethacrylate/carboxylic
monomers, multiple functional
acrylate monomers water,
activator (for chemical cure)

Light or chemical activation of
polymerization and acid–base
reaction

Cavities in deciduous
teeth, cervical cavities in
adults, anterior proximal
restorations in adults, small
load-bearing restorations in
adults, temporary

Methacrylate monomers,
fillers, light-activated
initiator(s)

Methacrylate monomers,
fillers, activator (for chemical
cure)

Polymerization by light
and chemical activation, or
chemical activation only

Polymethyl methacrylate
polymer beads

Liquid 1: Methacrylate
monomers Liquid 2: Catalyst

Chemical-activated
polymerization

Disalicylate

Butyl ethylene glycol salicylate
resin, bismuth oxide

Resimpol natural resin, 13%
“MTA” (tri-/dicalcium silicate
and tricalcium aluminate?),
titania and silica

Chemical-activated
polymerization

Endodontic sealing

Disalicylate

Glycol disalicylate, titanium
dioxide and barium sulfate,
titania, zinc oxide

Ethyl toluene sulfonamide,
calcium hydroxide, zinc oxide,
zinc stearate

Chemical-activated
polymerization

Pulp capping

Epoxy

Bisphenol-A epoxy resin,
bisphenol-F epoxy resin,
calcium tungstate, zirconium
oxide, silica, iron-oxide
pigments

Dibenzydiamine,
aminoadamantane,
tricyclodecane-diamine,
calcium tungstate, zirconium
oxide, silica, silicone oil

Chemical-activated
polymerization

Endodontic sealing

Resin-modified glass
ionomer (hybrid ionomer)

Two-Paste Systems
Materials
Compomer

Resin cement

Metal, lithium disilicate,
alumina or zirconia
prostheses,* metal posts/
core

Ceramic veneers, Maryland
bridges, lithium disilicate,
alumina, zirconia, cores and
posts

CHAPTER 7

TABLE 7-1

Dental Cements

131

Overview of Dental Cements—cont’d

Single Component
Materials

Paste or Liquid

Reaction Type

Indications

Compomer

Methacrylate monomer,
acidic monomer,
fluoroaluminosilicate glass,
initiator

Light-activated polymerization

Cavities in deciduous teeth,
cervical cavities in adults,
anterior proximal restorations
in adults, small load-bearing
restorations in adults,
temporary

Varnish

Resins, organic solvent
(acetone); chloroform ether
may include silver, fluoride, or
calcium compounds

Evaporation of solvent

Pulp protection, surficial ion
release for caries prevention
or remineralization

Inert

Methacrylate monomers,
initiator, ceramic fillers

Light-activated polymerization

Cementing ceramic
restorations or orthodontic
brackets

Tri-/dicalcium silicate

Methacrylate monomers,
initiators, tri-/dicalcium
silicate, barium zirconate

Light-activated polymerization

Pulp-capping, pulpotomies

Tri-/dicalcium silicate

Organic liquid, tri-/dicalcium
silicate, radiopaque powder

Hydration in vivo

Pulpotomies, endodontic
sealing

Calcium hydroxide

Iodoform, silicone, calcium
hydroxide

Nonsetting

Primary tooth pulpectomy

Tri-/dicalcium silicate

Tricalcium silicate, salicylate
resin, titanium oxide, calcium
tungstate

Nonsetting

Primary tooth pulpectomy

EBA, ethoxybenzoic acid.
*
Don’t use for anterior because of opacity.

reaction with water that is either included in two-part systems or
absorbed from the tooth. The exception is the nonsetting materials used with primary teeth after a pulpectomy, where a cement
should not interfere with exfoliation.
Long-term retention of devices is important for crowns and
bridges. However, temporary cements are sometimes needed,
for instance, when transient devices are placed during prosthetic
treatments. Dental cements are crucial for orthodontic brackets
and bands, but the durability of these materials can be less than
other cements because orthodontic treatments usually last about
2 years. Sealants and cements to reduce sensitivity (by occluding
exposed dentinal tubules) are not expected to last long term.

Performance Criteria for Dental Cements
Dental cements must solidify into a biocompatible mass in the
oral cavity and function over time in vivo by resisting hydrolysis (degradation by water). Properties of dental cements vary, but
those that are often compared include the mixing time, working
time, setting time, film thickness, compressive strength, and
vulnerability to acid. Requirements for dental cements (base/
liner and luting materials) have been codified in International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) Standards 9917-1 and
9917-2 (Dentistry−Water-Based Cements) and ISO 6876:2012
(Root Canal Sealing Materials), where the test methods for these
properties are described. These standards apply to water-based luting cement, bases, linings, restorations, core buildup materials,
and root canal sealing. See Table 7-2 for the requirements. Except

for root canal sealers, cements should set in less than 8 minutes
(min) and resist acid erosion.

Solubility and Disintegration of Cements
Cements are often placed supragingivally and exposed to a variety
of acids produced by microorganisms or as components of foods
and drinks. ISO 9917-1 describes the erosion test of impinging a
0.1-M solution of lactic acid/sodium lactate (pH = 2.74) on waterbased cements. The depth of erosion after 24 hours (h) is measured
as mm/h. The results show that the rate of erosion decreased from
conventional GIC to hybrid GIC to compomer. The solubility
procedure described in ISO 4049 for dental composites uses the
weight (mg) and volume (mm3) of the specimen before immersion
in water and the weight of the specimen after 5 days of immersion,
and then desiccation. The solubility is calculated by dividing the
weight changes by the volume. ISO 6876 for endodontic sealers
measures the weight of the specimen before 24 h of immersion in
water, and the weight percentage of residue is reported.
Testing conditions have been shown to significantly influence the solubility, such as varying the pH, the electrolytic concentration of the storage media, the soaking or impingement of
a test medium on the cement, the powder-to-liquid (P/L) ratio
of the cement, and the testing duration. For example, lowering
the pH and P/L ratio will generally increase solubility. Delaying
exposure to a storage medium decreases solubility. Some cements
show no solubility (by weight) when concurrent dissolution and
water sorption occur. Therefore poor correlation has been found

132

PA RT I I

TABLE 7-2

Direct Restorative Materials

ISO Requirements

ISO 9917-1 Water-Based Cements—Part 1: Powder/Liquid Acid-Base Cements

Zn PHOSPHATE

Zn POLYCARBOXYLATE

GLASS IONOMER

Cement Type

Luting

Liner or Base

Luting

Liner or Base

Luting

Liner or Base

Maximum mixing time (min)

2.5

2

2.5

2

1.5

1.5

Final setting time (min)

8

6

8

6

8

6

Maximum film thickness (μm)

25

nr

25

nr

25

nr

Minimum compressive strength (MPa)

50

Maximum acid erosion (mm)

0.3

0.4

0.17

ISO 9917-2 Water-Based Cements—Part 2: Resin-Modified Cements

Cement Use

Luting

Liner or Base

Restorative

Minimum working time (min)

1.5

1.5

1.5

Minimum setting time (min)

8

6

6

Maximum film thickness (μm)

25

nr

Minimum flexural strength (MPa)

10

10

25

ISO 6876 Root Canal Sealing Materials/ADA 57 Endodontic Sealing Materials

Property

Requirement

Flow (mm)

>17

Working time

To be stated by manufacturer in minutes or hours

Setting time

To be stated by manufacturer in minutes or hours

Maximum film thickness (μm)

50

Solubility (%)

<3

Radiopacity (mm of equivalent Al)

>3

Dimensional stability (ADA 57 only)

<0.1% expansion, less than 1% shrinkage

ADA, American Dental Association; nr, no requirement.

for solubility data from the acidic-erosion and passive-weight-loss
tests. In vitro data show that cement solubility differs among categories of materials and products. For the cements that rely on
water to set, the solubility increases from glass ionomer to zinc
phosphate and polycarboxylate cements. The solubilities between
zinc polycarboxylate cement and zinc phosphate cement were not
significantly different when mixed as recommended. However, a
reduction in the powder-to-liquid ratio for zinc polycarboxylate
reduced the viscosity and produced a cement that disintegrated
rapidly. Zinc phosphate cements have a relatively low solubility
in water; however, in vivo disintegration occurs with the lactic,
acetic, and citric acids present in foods.
With solubility being inversely proportional to the resin content, resin cements are the least soluble of all dental cements,
especially hydrophobic resins. The low solubility of resin cement
makes this material suitable for cementing all-ceramic or resinbased restorations, where more cement may be exposed compared
with metal or metal-ceramic restorations. Polymerizing monomers
in glass-ionomer cements (RMGIs) have reduced the solubility
compared with GIC.
The durability of some cements has been tested by placing
small specimens of the cements in intraoral appliances that can

be removed from the mouth to measure the loss of material.
In one study, cements were inserted in tiny wells placed in the
proximal surfaces of cast crown restorations. These crowns were
cemented with temporary ZOE cement. After 1 year, the crowns
were removed, and the cement loss was measured. GIC degraded
the least, followed by zinc polycarboxylate cement, zinc phosphate cement, and zinc polycarboxylate cement mixed in a lower
P/L ratio.
The solubilities of endodontic sealers based on ZOE and early
formulations of glass ionomer were near the maximum allowed
in ISO specifications (3%). ZOE-based root canal sealers have
been used successfully for decades in endodontics, despite their
high solubility. Sealers with epoxy or polyvinyl siloxane (PVS)
bases have significantly lower solubility among endodontic sealers. The tri-/dicalcium silicate cements do not meet this limit after
24 hours; however, after longer times, these materials become less
soluble. Immediately after setting, the tri-/dicalcium silicates have
calcium hydroxide on the surface, which is beneficial for bioactivity but appears as solubility. Nevertheless, the tricalcium silicate
sealers are highly successful clinically.
The variety of dental cements encompasses many material categories, and the properties vary widely, as discussed herein.

CHAPTER 7

80

The anticariogenic potential of silicate cement confirms the ability
of F– to inhibit demineralization and lead to the development of
several fluoride-containing restorative materials and cements: conventional glass ionomers, resin-modified glass ionomers, polyacidmodified composites (compomers), and fluoridated varnishes. For
the fluorosilicate glass-based materials, fluoride is first dissolved
in the matrix from the glass during the acid–base reaction, and
then released to the oral cavity. For fluoridated varnishes, the fillers incorporated in the material dissolve partially upon contact
with saliva, and then F– is released from the varnishes. The rate
of fluoride release depends on the cement matrix, porosity, and
nature of the fluoridated filler (i.e., type, amount, particle, and
size). Figure 7-1 illustrates the typical behavior of fluoride release
from dental materials.
In vitro data have shown that fluoride release from GIC
remains detectable for years, although the rate of release is reduced
by a factor of 10 within the first few months (Figure 7-1, A). The
release rate and duration depend on the cement matrix; porosity;
and the fluoridated filler’s type, amount, silanation, and particle
size. Figure 7-1, B & C illustrate the typical behavior of fluoride
release from dental materials.

70

Clinical Significance
In vitro studies have shown that fluoride-releasing restoratives
inhibit the enamel and dentin demineralization produced by
acidic gels or demineralizing buffer solutions. The inhibition of
enamel demineralization reached up to 7 mm from the edge of
the material. These results were confirmed by microradiographic
assessments of the lesion depth of artificial caries and the mineral
density of enamel adjacent to a conventional and a resin-modified
glass-ionomer. For both materials, lesion depth increased, and
mineral density decreased, with increasing distance (1 to 3 mm)
from the restoration margin.
Fluoride release varies between categories of material and brands
and is influenced by the material and the material’s setting mechanisms, the fluoride content, and the testing conditions. Clinical
studies have not clearly shown whether the initial burst or longterm release of F ions is clinically more important to prevent caries. Despite the proven effects from in vitro studies, clinical studies

60
50
40
30
20

0

Recharge

0

25

50

A

75

100

125

100

125

10

12

Time (d)
700

Cumulative release (mg/cm2)

Fluoride-release studies usually are conducted in vitro, where the
experimental conditions are controlled and the fluoride release
is easier to measure. Also, the intrinsic characteristics of the
material—such as formulas, filler compositions, ratios of component mixing, mixing procedure, and curing time—can be studied
more easily. For such in vitro tests, the protocols have varied in
terms of the composition and pH of storage media, the frequency
of the storage solution change, and plaque and pellicle formation.
When the demineralization–remineralization cycling is used
in in vitro studies, higher fluoride release is observed in acids.
However, ion-enriched (ions other than F−) storage media, such as
artificial saliva, reduce the release of fluoride and surface coatings
from human saliva. The presence of esterase or hydrolases in the
storage media or on the surface of the material increases fluoride
release. Although removal of the outer layer of the material by air
polishing or finishing can lead to higher release, toothbrushing has
not been found to affect fluoride release.

133

10

600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0

25

50

B

75

Time (d)
700

Cumulative release (mg/cm2)

Factors Affecting Fluoride Release in Vitro

Release rate (mg/d.cm2)

Fluoride-Releasing Materials

Dental Cements

600
500
400
300
200
100
0

C

0

2

4

6

8

Square root of time (d0.5)

• Figure 7-1 Typical fluoride-release profiles. A, Release rate versus time;
the spike reflects fluoride recharging, and the blue dotted line represents the
fluoride release where no recharging has occurred. B, Cumulative release
over time; the diamonds are experimental data of (A) without recharging,
and the curve is the best-fit curve of Y (total release) = a + b • (time){1/2}.
C, The same data in (B) plotted against the square root of time, revealing
a linear relationship. The effect of recharging is not shown in (B) or (C).

134

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

conflict as to whether these materials sufficiently prevent or inhibit
recurrent caries compared with nonfluoridated restoratives. Further
clinical studies, preferably in split-mouth designs, are needed to evaluate the impact of fluoride-releasing restoratives on recurrent caries
development and progression, especially in patient groups that have
limited access to or low compliance with prophylactic measures.
An in situ study compared the effectiveness of a conventional
GIC, an RMGI, a compomer, and a fluoridated composite for
resistance to enamel lesion formation using intraoral appliances
embedded with these materials. Intraoral appliances were worn by
the subjects for 4 weeks without additional application of topical
fluorides. The results showed that only one ion-releasing material led to significantly lower lesion depth and mineral loss. No
other materials had a preventive effect on recurrent caries. Clinical
studies of fluoride-releasing composites often show no differences
in the occurrence of recurrent caries.

Fluoride Recharge
Dental restoratives are frequently exposed to exogenous sources
of fluoride, such as fluoridated dentifrices, mouth rinses, fluoride
gels, and varnishes. These released fluoride ions can be absorbed
by the dental restoratives to “recharge” with fluoride. A common
recharging method is exposing the restorative to a concentrated
fluoride agent such as 0.02% NaF solution (90 ppm) or 1.23%
(12,300 ppm) acidulated phosphate fluoride (APF) solution for 4
to 5 min, although treatments up to 1 hour have been reported.
Recharging is more effective with acidic fluoridating agents, such
as APF. However, APF is known to cause surface damage of some
restorative materials. The ability of a restorative material to be
recharged and serve as a fluoride reservoir depends on the type and
permeability of the material, the frequency of fluoride exposure,
and the concentration of the fluoridating agent. Glass ionomers,
resin-modified glass ionomers, and compomers are recharged
more easily than composite resin-based materials. In vivo fluoride
recharging is influenced by saliva and plaque. The higher viscosity of saliva reduces the diffusion of ions in and out of the material. The formation of a surface pellicle is a barrier hampering the
recharging process. The release data for recharged materials is significantly higher in the first 24 hours but decreases within several
days to the preexposure level (Figure 7-1, A), suggesting that the
initial release may occur partly by washout of fluoride ions retained
on the surface or in the pores of the material. The level of release
after recharging depends on the concentration of the recharging
medium and the duration of treatment.

metallic material is used to restore the tooth, discomfort may arise
from hot or cold nutrition or galvanic contact with metal restoratives on opposing dentition. During restorative procedures, the
acidic components of some dental cements may irritate the pulp
before setting. Therefore pulp protectants are required when little
protective dentin is left after a cavity preparation.
Pulp protectants for cavity preparations approximating the
pulp are denoted as pulp-capping materials, varnishes, cavity liners, or base materials. Pulp-capping materials are in direct contact
with the pulp, and their biocompatibility is crucial to the pulp’s
healing. Varnishes as very thin resin layers used to plug and block
the dentinal tubules exposed in a cavity preparation. Cavity liners
are thin layers and are used for indirect pulp capping when the
remaining dentin is less than 1 mm and are more protective than
varnishes. Base materials are placed in thicker layers than liners
and are commonly placed farther from the pulp. The base material
is needed for insulation from the thermal, chemical, or galvanic
irritations that may occur with restorative materials.

Pulp-Capping Materials
Pulp-capping agents are used when the pulp has been exposed
and bleeding is frank. The best pulp-capping and cavity-liner
materials are bioactive and antimicrobial. Bioactivity, as defined
in ISO 22317, is the spontaneous formation of a thin layer rich
in Ca and P, similar to hydroxyapatite, on the surface of a material
in vivo or synthetic body fluid. Bioactivity occurs by the release
of calcium and hydroxide ions that create a high pH (alkaline),
thus causing the precipitation of calcium phosphate from the
supersaturated body fluids in the vicinity of their surface. Bone
morphogenic protein (BMP) and transforming growth factorbeta one (TGF-β1) may be solubilized from the bone or dentine
by the high pH and released to stimulate repair. The pulp can
heal by forming pulpal odontoblasts on the calcium phosphate
layer of the bioactive materials, forming reparative dentin. Such a
histological result is shown in Figure 7-2. Bioactive pulp-capping

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the benefit of calcium hydroxide in contact with pulpal tissue?

Pulp Protection
Tooth enamel is a translucent crystalline bioceramic but is vulnerable to acids and the repeated stress of a lifetime of chewing. The
underlying dentin may be exposed to the oral cavity when the
enamel is worn, chemically eroded by acidic foods or cariogenic
bacteria, mechanically abraded by food or opposing teeth, fractured, or prepared for restoration. Depending on the remaining
dentin thickness, the exposed dentinal tubules provide a communication path to the pulp for acids and microbiological insults.
The dentin must be covered to minimize further damage. When

• Figure 7-2 Reactionary dentin. Histological section of a human tooth
submitted to a slight pathological stimulus from a deep cavity filled with
light-cured glass-ionomer cement, and then extracted 30 days after the
procedure. The remaining dentin thickness is 287 μm at the thinnest region. Note that the pulp tissue subjacent to the continuous odontoblast
layer (hollow arrows) does not show inflammation. (Courtesy Dr. Carlos
Alberto de Souza Costa.)

CHAPTER 7

Dental Cements

135

agents include calcium hydroxide powder and tri-/dicalcium silicate materials.

The properties and applications of tri-/dicalcium silicate will be
discussed in more detail later in the chapter.

Calcium Hydroxide
Calcium hydroxide medicaments are available as powder, onepaste, or two-paste products with radiopaque fillers. Calcium
hydroxide powder may simply be mixed with water and placed,
or some products disperse the powder in a carrier such as polyethylene glycol liquid, such as UltraCal (Ultradent Inc.). Other
products may include calcium hydroxide in a resin formula that
sets chemically or with light, such as Dycal (Caulk Dentsply
Sirona). Calcium hydroxide is sparingly soluble in water and does
not set into a hardened cement during the procedure but gradually converts to calcium carbonate by carbon dioxide in the blood
and oral fluids over time. Such products must not be left on the
margins of the cavity preparation; otherwise, the margin will not
be properly sealed. Calcium hydroxide is beneficial because of a
high pH, which makes this material antimicrobial. However, calcium hydroxide alone does not set or provide much thermal insulation but is bioinert. Histologically, calcium hydroxide stimulates
reparative dentin when placed on the pulp, although the reparative dentin may have tunnel defects.

Formocresol and Ferric Sulfate
Formocresol and ferric sulfate have been used as protective medicaments for partial or complete pulpotomy procedures, among
other techniques, including electrosurgery and laser cautery. Ferric sulfate and formocresol staunch the bleeding pulp, but neither
material is bioactive. By far, formocresol has been the most popular
among pediatric dentists. Ferric sulfate–treated pulpotomies have
led to the unfortunate consequence of root resorption. Calcium
hydroxide has not been popular in pediatric dentistry because this
material has been less successful with pulpal inflammation and
tooth resorption in small, thin primary teeth. The bioactive tricalcium silicate–based products are superseding the use of formocresol or ferric sulfate medicaments for pediatric pulpotomies, with a
better success rate for retention before exfoliation.
Pediatric pulpotomies may fail or may not be suitable because
of deeper infection of the pulp. For these cases, the pulp is extirpated, and the canal is filled with a nonsetting medicament. The
filling material is nonsetting to avoid interference with the primary tooth’s exfoliation. These materials should be radiopaque.
Two such materials contain calcium hydroxide in silicone oil or
tricalcium silicate powder in salicylate resin.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is MTA cement biocompatible and considered bioactive?

Tri-/Dicalcium Silicate
Tri-/dicalcium silicate (tricalcium silicate, for short) products are
also known by the names mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA),
calcium silicate, biosilicates, or bioceramics. Chemically, the predominant compounds in these cements are tricalcium silicate and
dicalcium silicate powders with inert radiopaque ceramic powders.
The tricalcium silicate powders are unique ceramic compounds
because they set with water and form calcium hydroxide as a reaction product within a hard matrix of hydrated tri- and dicalcium
silicate. The calcium hydroxide reaction product renders bioactivity and imparts antimicrobial properties. Furthermore, because
the calcium hydroxide is within a matrix, the alkalinity is sustained
longer than in calcium hydroxide alone. This type of cement is
thermally insulating and seals very well, without shrinkage.
For pulpotomies, hemorrhage should be controlled with a
cotton pellet moistened with saline, a dilute solution of sodium
hypochlorite (0.5% to 1.0%) before placement, to avoid blood
seeping into the cement and ensure removal of enough affected
pulp. The consistency of the tricalcium silicate can be fluid or
putty-like for pulpal placement. After placement, any restorative
material, including ZOE, GIC, hybrid ionomer liner, or flowable
compomer or composite, can be placed immediately over the tricalcium silicate without waiting for a full set of tricalcium silicates. Bonding agents do not adhere to tricalcium silicates, and
etching should not be performed directly on tricalcium silicates.
The precipitation of hydroxyapatite at interfaces with the tissue
should prevent the tricalcium silicates from being dislodged. After
pulpotomy treatment, the pulp should be periodically assessed for
vitality, as an indication of a dentinal barrier forming beneath the
tricalcium silicate cement. Tricalcium silicates have been added to
the resin matrix as pulp protectant, such as TheraCal and TheraCal PT (Bisco). These products set by light curing or dual curing
of the resin, but their bioactivity is lessened by the resin encapsulation of the bioactive component.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the purpose of using cavity varnishes, and why is copal varnish no
longer used as often as it was during the 1960s through 1990?

Cavity Varnishes and Liners
When the remaining dentin thickness is less than 1 mm, irritants
must be prevented from reaching the pulp through the dentinal
tubules by placing a protective layer. The classic pulp protectant is
a cavity varnish, which prevents pulpal irritation by occluding the
exposed dentinal tubules.
Varnishes are solutions of synthetic resins or natural gums, such
as copal or rosins, in an organic solvent (ethanol, acetone, chloroform, or ether). The varnish is applied as a thin coating on the
dentin, which forms a coherent layer as the solvent evaporates in
about 30 seconds. At least two layers of varnish should be applied to
obtain a complete, continuous coating with few pinholes. Each varnish layer should be thoroughly dried before proceeding. Varnishes
are applied with a disposable brush or a small pledget of cotton. For
infection control, a used varnish applicator should not be inserted
in a varnish bottle; hence, unit-dose containers are common.
Additional cavity-liner products include low-viscosity ZOE,
glass ionomer, calcium hydroxide products, and the tricalcium silicates. Calcium hydroxide–containing products are preferred for
cavity lining, for the same reason as the pulp-capping materials:
bioactivity. Some liners adhere to the tooth, enhancing their ability to seal the dentinal tubules. Glass ionomers are less desirable in
the vicinity of the pulp because of their acidity, but resin-modified
glass ionomers are used. Varnish is not indicated or needed when
adhesive materials are selected for restorations. The resin bonding
systems serve the same role as varnish.

Fluoridated Varnishes
Varnishes containing fluoride are applied superficially on teeth.
Varnishes reduce sensitivity by occluding dentinal tubules and

136

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

provide fluoride release. Typically, these varnishes contain 5%
sodium fluoride to elute fluoride ions, although others contain
calcium fluoride or amorphous calcium phosphate. Varnish films
are temporarily effective but must be reapplied for caries prevention at hygiene appointments. Superficial varnishes are often flavored for patient acceptance (Figure 7-3, left).
Silver nitrate has a long history of use to arrest caries. Later,
a Japanese researcher developed a 38% silver diammine fluoride
solution for arresting caries and reducing dentinal sensitivity
(Figure 7-3, right). The silver ions are dissolved in an ammonia solution, which can attack and kill bacteria. The term silver diammine fluoride (SDF) has been accepted in dentistry for
AgF • (NH3)2. SDF solutions contain twice the fluoride present in
a 5% NaF varnish. This solution will arrest caries by precipitating
the silver ions but will darken carious lesions with silver precipitates. Darkening of the tooth can be alleviated by using a potassium iodide solution after application of the SDF. This material
is convenient to use for the medically compromised or bedridden
and primary teeth, despite the discoloration.

Cement Bases
Cement bases are more distant from the pulp and placed at the
bottom of cavity preparations. Bases provide thermal or galvanic
insulation (Chapter 3, Clinical Significance of Galvanic Currents), although eliminating communication to the pulp is also
important. Being farther from the pulp allows some acidic materials to be used, such as zinc phosphate cement. Zinc phosphate
cement has been an effective base material because this cement
is thermally insulating but has a low pH (acidity) and therefore
requires another material under the cement to protect the pulp.

When mixed as a base, zinc phosphate cement should be kept cool
and mixed to a thick, nontacky, putty-like consistency that slows
the reaction and minimizes free acid on the surface when placed.
ZOE, zinc polycarboxylate, fast-setting glass ionomers, calcium
hydroxide, and tricalcium silicate cements have been used as cavity bases. All these cements contain ceramic powders, which inherently have lower thermal and electrical conductivity than metals
(Table 7-3). Heat transfer is a complex phenomenon that depends
on the material’s heat capacity, thickness, and density (Chapter 3,
Thermal Properties).
Cement bases should be strong enough to withstand condensation forces during placement of restorative materials, especially
amalgam, and the forces during mastication or bruxing. Table 7-4
shows the compressive strength of representative dental cements
over 24 hours. For most dental cements, the strength increases
rapidly over 30 min and keeps increasing on the first day. Notably,
the tricalcium silicate cements mature by hydration more slowly
and gain their strength over 1 month, but especially during the
first week. The minimum strength required of base materials to
resist masticatory forces has not been determined because of the
complexity and the influence of the design of the prepared tooth
cavity. However, a study of amalgam restorations placed over a

TABLE 7-3

Material

Approximate Thermal Conductivity
(mcal/cm-s-K)

Dentin

1–2.3

Enamel

1.6–2.2

Tricalcium silicate
cement

0.7

Glass

2–2.5

Zinc phosphate cement

2.5–3.1

Zinc oxide–eugenol

4.0

Amalgam

5.4

Stainless steel

38

Gold

740

TABLE 7-4

Compressive Strength of Cement Base
Materials

Material

7 Min (MPa)

30 Min (MPa)

24 Hours (MPa)

2.8

3.5

5.2

6.2

6.9

12.4

15.9

20.7

24.1

Calcium
hydroxide

3.8

4.8

10.3

7.6

6.2

8.3

Tricalcium
silicate

~0

Not determined

14–40

Zinc
phosphate

6.9

86.9

119.3

Zinc oxide–
eugenol

• Figure 7-3 Flavored fluoride varnish for surface application to teeth, especially primary teeth (left), and silver diammine fluoride solution cleared in
the United States for sensitivity treatments, used off-label for caries treatment (right). (Courtesy Elevate Oral Care.)

Thermal Conductivity of Cement Base and
Reference Materials

CHAPTER 7

hard-setting calcium hydroxide base showed no evidence of failure, even though the strength of the material was only about
10 MPa after 1 day. For a class I tooth preparation where the base
is supported on all sides by tooth structure, less strength is necessary than is required for class II preparations.

CRITICAL QUESTION
During the initial seating of a three-unit fixed partial denture (bridge), the
prosthesis fits the prepared tooth perfectly and appears to be retained on
the tooth so tenaciously that removal requires a great deal of force. Why is
cement required for retention under this condition?

Cements for Luting
The first zinc oxide–based cement for cementing fixed prostheses
was not adhesive to the tooth or metal prostheses. The cement
functioned by filling the microscopic space between the device
and the tooth and hardening to a high cohesive mass, which prevented dislodgement (Figure 7-4). The mechanical retention is

• Figure 7-4 Diagram of the suggested mechanism through which a
dental cement provides mechanical retention of a gold crown. The cement penetrates irregularities in the tooth structure and the casting. Upon
hardening, these retentive sites aid in retaining the cast crown in place.
The enlargement shows a fracture through the cement, resulting in dislodgment of the crown.

Dental Cements

137

obtained by the combination of the microscopically rough tooth
and prosthesis surfaces, along with the rigid cement that fills the
gaps. This mechanical retention is referred to as luting, where zinc
phosphate is the dominating cement. The degree of cement retentiveness for a given restoration relies on many factors: prepared
tooth form, height, number of abutments, accuracy of superstructure fit, distribution of the cement, and occlusion. Dental
prostheses that are mechanically retained include the following:
(1) fixed prosthodontics made of metal, ceramic-veneered metal,
or ceramic; (2) temporary restorations; (3) pins and posts used
for retention of restorations; and (4) implant superstructures. As
discussed in Chapter 6, Luting Agents, luting traditionally refers
to the use of nonadhesive materials for retaining prostheses, and
bonding refers to the use of adhesive bonding materials. The distinction has faded in the literature; the use of adhesive bonding
medium is also referred to as luting.
When a device is seated without a luting agent, point contacts
are made between the tooth and the appliance (Figure 7-5A & B).
The cement is used to fill the areas that are not in contact. The
cement prevents oral fluid from flowing between the surfaces,
thereby preventing bacterial invasion. Luting of a device to a tooth
requires a cement of low viscosity and low contact angle to the
tooth and the appliance to form a continuous film (Figure 7-5, C),
without the formation of voids at interface (Figure 7-5, D). Voids
impair the cement’s ability to support and retain a prosthesis.
Porosity in powder-liquid cements is created from incorporating air while mixing powder into liquid. One study with luting agents showed that the method of mixing had no influence
on the formation of small pores, but hand mixing yielded more
large pores than triturator mixing. Porosity measurement of handmixed powder-to-liquid cements showed that polycarboxylate
cement had the highest porosity, followed by zinc phosphate and
GICs. Higher viscosity generally leads to more pores during mixing. If air bubbles are entrapped, masticatory forces may fracture
weak appliances such as veneers. When a void-free layer is formed
and hardens, one surface is wedged against another to resist the
shearing stresses that might dislodge the appliance.
To choose a cement for attaching a fixed prosthesis, the key
characteristics are the working time, setting time, consistency,
ease of removal of excess material, and adhesion. Any cement

A

B

C

D

• Figure 7-5 Schematic illustration of the abutment–prosthesis interfaces. A, Irregular surface morphology of the two surfaces to be bonded. B, Two surfaces pressed against each other without an intermediate
layer. Note the small number of points of contact illustrated by the circles. C, Continuous interface when a
third material, either cement or adhesive, is used as the intermediate layer. D, Voids generated as a result
of the inability of the intermediate layer to wet the surfaces completely.

138

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

for attachment must flow under pressure and wet (spread over)
the tooth and prosthetic surfaces. The internationally accepted
requirements for luting cements are shown in Tables 7-2. Luting cements are required to have a film thickness less than 25 μm
when tested according to American National Standards Institute
(ANSI)/American Dental Association (ADA) Specification No. 96
and ISO 9917-1 or 9917-2. For endodontic sealers, which are discussed later, the maximum film thickness is 50 μm per ISO 6876.
The film thickness essentially reflects the consistency of the cement
mixture and is affected by the size of particles and the P/L ratio.
The ISO film-thickness test method requires freshly mixed cement
to be placed between two optically flat surfaces, and a 150-N vertical load is applied. Seven minutes later, the thickness of the film is
measured. Such samples should appear to create continuous films.
The intaglio of a crown must be cleaned before the application
of luting cement. The interior surface should be carefully abraded
with a stone or sandblasted with alumina abrasive. Prolonged
sandblasting can deform metal margins or erode ceramic margins
and should be avoided. Crowns should be thoroughly rinsed to
remove debris and dried. Cementing a prosthesis to a tooth occurs
in three steps after the cement is mixed, if mixing is required:
cement placement, seating, and excess-cement removal.
After mixing, a luting cement should be as free of bubbles
as possible, and then placed in the intaglio of a crown or bridge
(Figure 7-6, A & B). The cement should coat the entire intaglio
surface but fill only a portion of the intaglio. Filling the entire

intaglio increases the risk for bubble entrapment, the time and
pressure needed for seating, and the time and effort required to
remove excess cement. A fixed prosthesis should be fully seated
with moderate finger pressure, displacing excess cement.
Cement thickness is not the same as film thickness but refers to
the actual thickness of the cement that occurs clinically between a
cast crown, inlay, onlay, or veneer and the tooth structure. Lowerviscosity cements make the seating process easier. Thinner cement
layers are created by applying sufficient seating force such that excess
cement is expressed at the margin. Tapping the crown or vibrating
the crown with an ultrasonic device may help achieve complete seating. Asking the patient to bite on a soft substance such as wood or
a cotton roll also helps complete seating and expels excess cement
(Figure 7-6, C). Three points on the margin should be examined
with an explorer to ensure seating was complete. The design of
the prosthesis should allow the cement to flow and create an even
layer of cement between the prosthetic device and the tooth. However, a higher taper of the tooth preparation (Figure 7-6, D) and
a lower crown height reduce retention. Cement thickness between
the prosthesis and the abutment should be thin to minimize pores,
maximize retention, and minimize plaque accumulation and microleakage between the device and the tooth.
Cement thickness plays a significant role in prosthesis retention. The thickness varies with (1) the amount of force applied
during seating of the prosthesis, (2) the direction in which the
force is applied to the prosthesis during seating, (3) the design
of the prosthesis relative to hindering or facilitating the flow of
cement, (4) the fit of the prosthesis on the prepared tooth, and (5)
the inherent film thickness of the cement. An acceptable cement
thickness value in the literature is between 25 and 150 μm.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does the technique of removing excess cement differ among the types
of cements?

A

B

C

D

• Figure 7-6 Mechanics of cementing a prosthesis. A, Assembly of a
fixed prosthesis and respective tooth preparation. B, Luting agent placed
in the prosthesis should cover the entire surface. C, Space for expelling excess cement decreases as the prosthesis reaches its final position. Arrows show the thickness of space for expelling excess cement.
D, Higher degree of the abutment taper provides a greater space for expelling excess cement.

Excess luting cement should be present at the margin of a
crown just after seating, an indication of complete cement coverage under the crown. The technique of removing excess cement
depends on the properties of the cement that should be described
in the instructions for use. A knotted dental floss should be run
through the interproximal regions immediately after complete
seating of the prosthesis to remove excess cement and create access
for cement removal required in other parts of the margin.
Aqueous-based cements mature after the setting and require
moisture, but not too much moisture. As a precaution, the clinician should apply a varnish coat (or a bonding agent) along the
accessible margin of cemented restorations before discharging the
patient. This coating should seal the margin, prevent dissolution,
and avoid infiltration by food or beverages during maturation,
and it may release fluoride.
A crown or bridge may be dislodged after the cement has
set if the cement fractures, dissolves, or erodes, which leaves a
space where plaque may accumulate, and caries may recur in the
marginal opening (Figure 7-7). Care must be exercised during luting to avoid this occurrence.

Zinc Oxide–Based Cements
The zinc oxide group of cements include zinc phosphate, zinc
carboxylate, and ZOE cements (Figure 7-8). Although they are
less popular today, understanding these cements enables one

CHAPTER 7

to appreciate the evolution of dental cements to contemporary
adhesives. The acid–base reaction never progresses to completion.
Therefore the hardened cements retain composite structure, unreacted powder particles in a matrix of reaction products.

Zinc Phosphate Cement
This cement’s powder contains zinc oxide (>75%) and as much
as 13% magnesia (magnesium oxide) and radiopaque powder.
The zinc oxide and magnesia may have been sintered, and then
ground into a fine powder; the sintering intimately combines the
two powders to control the setting rate. The finer the particle size,
the faster the cement sets, which is true for all the powder–liquid
reactions. Bismuth oxide is common as a radiopaque powder component in these cements. The water-based liquid contains phosphoric acid (38% to 59%), aluminum phosphate (2% to 3%),
and sometimes zinc phosphate (0% to 10%) to adjust the setting
reaction to a rate suitable for dentistry.

Critical Question
Explain why zinc phosphate cement should be mixed by increments on a cool
slab.

To mix zinc phosphate cement, the powder should be dispensed first on a cool glass mixing slab and divided into six increments, usually noted in the manufacturer’s instructions for use.
The temperature of the glass slab should be above the dew point

Dental Cements

139

of the room; otherwise, moisture condensed on the slab will dilute
the liquid, reducing the strength of the zinc phosphate cement.
Next, the liquid is dispensed just before mixing to minimize the
evaporation of water from the liquid. When the powder and liquid are mixed, the phosphoric acid solution (pH ~0.5) dissolves
the outer surface of the particle. The dissolved zinc ions react with
the aluminum phosphate ions in the liquid to precipitate a zinc
alumino-phosphate gel on the remaining undissolved zinc oxide
particles. The reaction between zinc oxide and phosphoric acid is
exothermic and requires a strict mixing protocol to control excess
heat generation. A small increment of powder is first mixed to
reduce the acidity of the liquid. Subsequent increments of powder
are added, and the heat also increases. Brisk spatulation for less
than 20 seconds is needed for each powder increment, with all
powder incorporated within 2 min to create a creamy mixture.
The heat must be dissipated properly by the cool glass slab; otherwise, the reaction will accelerate and shorten the working time.
Nonabsorbent paper pads should not be used. A test of “stringing”
the cement before use will indicate if the mixture is too viscous for
cementation.
After seating a prosthesis with a zinc phosphate cement, firm
pressure and a dry field are needed until the cement sets. Excess
cement in the interproximal area should be removed immediately
with a knotted dental floss after complete seating. The rest can
be removed after complete setting. Varnish or other nonpermeable coating should be applied at the margin to allow the cement
to mature isolated from the oral fluids. If a cavity liner has been
applied before the zinc phosphate cement, retention will be lower
because of the smooth liner surface with less interlocking.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why should freshly mixed zinc polycarboxylate cement be applied on the
tooth preparation before the cement loses its glossy appearance?

• Figure 7-7 Loss of cement at the marginal area resulting from exposure
to oral fluid.

Zinc Polycarboxylate Cement
Zinc polycarboxylate cement evolved from zinc phosphate and
was the first dental cement that chemically bonded to teeth. This
powder–liquid cement sets via an acid–base reaction of a powder
similar to that of zinc phosphate cement with a liquid based on
polyacrylic acids having a molecular weight of 30,000 to 50,000
Dalton. The acid concentration varies from 32% to 42% by weight.
Zinc polycarboxylate cements set by the acid-dissolving part of the
zinc oxide particles, which releases zinc, magnesium, and tin ions
that bind and crosslink the carboxyl groups. The polyacrylic acid
bonds to the zinc ions of the powder and to the calcium ions of
the mineralized tooth. A crosslinked polycarboxylate matrix phase

A
B
C
• Figure 7-8 Zinc oxide–based cement. A, Zinc-phosphate cement. B, Zinc polycarboxylate cement.
C, Polymer-reinforced zinc oxide–eugenol cement.

140

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

is formed, which encapsulates the unreacted portion of the particles, as with zinc phosphate cement. Stannous fluoride may be a
minor component to modify the setting time, raise the strength,
and enhance manipulative properties. The fluoride released from
such zinc carboxylate is minor compared with that released from
the glass-ionomer cements discussed later.
The powder may be refrigerated, which will retard the reaction.
However, the liquid should not be refrigerated because this will
cause it to thicken. Polycarboxylate cements are mixed at about
1.5:1 powder:liquid by weight on a nonabsorbent surface. The
powder should be incorporated into the liquid to create a glossy
mixture, indicative of carboxylic acid on the surface for bonding
to the tooth. A cool slab can be used to lengthen the working time
for zinc carboxylate cement, even though the reaction is not exothermic; however, a cool slab thickens the polyacrylic acid, which
hinders mixing.
A meticulously clean tooth surface is necessary to achieve adhesion and ensure intimate contact between the polycarboxylate
cement and the tooth. Application of a 10% polyacrylic or maleic
acid solution (10 to 15 seconds) should precede cement application, followed by rinsing with water. After cleansing, the abutment
should be isolated and blotted dry to prevent contamination by oral
fluids. Drying with an air syringe is acceptable, although the patient
may experience discomfort if a vital tooth is not anesthetized. The
outer surface of a prosthesis should be coated carefully with a separating medium, such as petroleum jelly. The separating medium
prevents excess polycarboxylate cement from adhering to the crown
so that excess cement can be removed when the cement hardens.
The working time for polycarboxylate cement is much shorter
than for zinc phosphate cement, approximately 2.5 versus 5 min;
therefore rapid spatulation and prompt seating are necessary to
ensure a low cement thickness. The pH of the cement liquid is initially very low (1.7) but higher than that of zinc phosphate, and it
rises rapidly as the setting reaction proceeds. During setting, polycarboxylate cement passes through a rubbery stage. Excess cement
should not be removed during this stage because the cement can
be pulled out from the margins, leaving a void. The setting time
ranges from 6 to 8 min as required in ISO 9917-1. Because of
the short working time, only crowns or short bridge spans can be
cemented with zinc polycarboxylate cement. The adhesive acrylic
bonds create a cement that can withstand thermal cycling, unlike
zinc phosphate cement.

cement: (1) temporary cementation, (2) long-term cementation
of fixed prostheses, (3) temporary fillings and thermal insulating
bases, and (4) intermediate restorations. ZOE cements are also
used as root canal sealers and periodontal dressings. Temporary
ZOE restorations are expected to last a few weeks. The antimicrobial attribute of ZOE is a benefit compared with glass-ionomer
cements or resin composites. However, ZOE cements can cause
pulpal necrosis; therefore ZOE should not be used directly on
pulp. Indirectly used, ZOE has a sedative effect by sealing the
dentinal tubules against the ingress of oral fluids until a more permanent restoration can be fabricated and cemented.
Intermediate-duration ZOE cements serve as a restorative material for about 1 year. To achieve the properties necessary for this
use, a stiff, putty-like restorative consistency must be used (high P/L
ratio). The higher the P/L ratio, the faster the material sets. A cool
glass mixing slab slows the setting, which should be above the dew
point to avoid moisture condensation and dilution of the cement.
An excellent application for these ZOE cements is for temporary or provisional (short-term or intermediate-term) luting of
provisional fixed prosthodontics. Long-term ZOE luting cements
are somewhat difficult to manipulate because their film thicknesses are high, and excess cement is difficult to remove; therefore
long-term ZOE luting cements should never be used for temporary cementation. ZOE cement is used for implant superstructure
cementation, where more retentive cements could lead to damage
of the supporting implant if retrieval is required. The consequence
of the less adhesive cement is potential loosening of the implant
prosthesis.
To improve the strength of ZOE cements, part of the eugenol
liquid has been replaced by orthoethoxybenzoic acid and alumina
added to the powder. Another system, called polymer-reinforced
ZOE, incorporates a powder containing 20 to 40 wt% fine polymer particles and zinc oxide particles treated with carboxylic acid.
Residual eugenol is thought to interfere with the proper polymerization of resin-based composites or cements; therefore some
carboxylic acids have been used to replace eugenol and produce
a ZOE-like material. Such products are called zinc oxide–noneugenol cements. The compressive strength of these improved ZOE
cements is acceptable, but their strength values are inferior to
those of glass-ionomer and resin cements (Table 7-4).

Zinc Oxide Eugenol and Noneugenol Cements
ZOE cements have been formulated as powder–liquid and twopaste systems. The powder–liquid combination contains zinc
oxide powder and eugenol liquid. The two-paste system includes
a base paste containing zinc oxide powder, and the eugenol is in
the accelerator (or catalyst). The ZOE setting reaction starts with
water present in the tooth or the eugenol solution hydrolyzing
the zinc oxide to form zinc hydroxide. The zinc hydroxide and
eugenol chelate and solidify. The reaction proceeds more rapidly
in a warm, humid environment, such as inside a tooth. When
zinc acetate dihydrate is included in the powder, the reaction is
faster; zinc acetate is more soluble than zinc oxide or hydroxide.
Acetic acid in the eugenol solution also accelerates the dissolution of zinc oxide. The setting reaction is slower for the other zinc
oxide cements. A wide variety of ZOE cements are available, with
compressive strengths ranging from 3 to 55 MPa. Finer powders
increase the strength of the resulting cement.
The versatility of ZOE is reflected in ISO 3107:2011 (ANSI/
ADA Standard No. 30), which lists four clinical types of ZOE

Glass polyalkenoate cement is the proper designation for specialized
glass powders that react with polyacrylic acid. However, glass ionomer, glass-ionomer cement, and GIC are recognized as acceptable
names within the dental profession. The glass-ionomer cements
are an improvement over the predecessor silicate cements because
they include the bonding mechanism found in the zinc carboxylate cement with glass powder. The result is a superior and versatile
material that is adherent, translucent, and fluoride releasing. GICs
have been used for (1) the esthetic restoration of anterior teeth
(e.g., class III and V sites), (2) adhesive cements for fixed prostheses and orthodontic appliances, (3) intermediate restorations, (4)
pit and fissure sealants, (5) cavity liners and bases, and (6) core
buildup materials. The GICs are classified by variations in powder
composition and particle size to achieve the desired function, as
follows:
Type I: Luting crowns, bridges, and orthodontic brackets
Type II a: Esthetic restorative cements
Type II b: Reinforced restorative cements
Type III: Lining cements and bases

Glass-Ionomer Cement

CHAPTER 7

Chemistry and Setting
The glass powders for GIC always contain silica, calcia, alumina,
fluoride, and other oxides (Table 7-5). Higher-atomic-number
metal oxides (baria, strontia) are included in the glass formulas
to increase radiopacity. During melting, the raw materials are
homogenized into an amorphous glassy mass at temperatures
between 1100° and 1500 °C. After the molten mass is quenched,
the glass is ground into a powder, with average particle sizes ranging from less than 10 to about 50 μm, depending on the indication. Coarser powders are used for restoratives, and finer particles
are used for cementing devices or pulpal protectant products.
These glass powders for polyalkenoate cements are soluble in the
polyacrylic acids.
The first aqueous GIC solutions contained 40% to 50% polyacrylic acid, but such liquids were viscous and had a short shelf
life because they gelled. Current glass-ionomer liquids contain
mixtures of copolymers of itaconic, maleic, or tricarboxylic acids
(Figure 7-9). Tartaric acid is used as a rate-controlling additive
in the GIC liquid to improve handling, decrease viscosity, and
increase working time. Tartaric acid also shortens the setting time
(Figure 7-10) by “sharpening” the setting curve and extends the
shelf life before the liquid gels. Adding 5% to 10% tartaric acid
enables the use of lower-fluoride-content glasses, which makes
the restoratives more translucent and esthetic. Fluoride in glass
can cause phase separation within the glass particles, which
creates opacity.
When the GIC powder and liquid are mixed, the acid starts
to dissolve the glass, releasing calcium, aluminum, sodium, and
fluorine ions into the liquid. The high aluminum content is the
key to the glass reactivity with polyacrylic acid. The undissolved
portion of the glass particles is sheathed by a silica-rich gel formed
on the surface of the glass particles when the ions are leached. The
polyacrylic acid chains crosslink with the calcium ions and aluminum ions. Sodium and fluorine ions of the glass do not participate
in the crosslinking of the cement. The set GIC consists of undissolved glass particles with a silica gel coating, embedded in an

Nominal Compositions of Glass-Ionomer
Cement Powders (wt%)

Compound

A

B

C

D

E

F

SiO2

36

20–30

41.9

35.2

34

32

Al2O3

36

10–20

28.6

20.1

45

32

AlF3

1.6

2.4

CaF2

15.7

20.1

NaF

9.3

3.6

AlPO4

3.8

12.0

CRITICAL QUESTION
Identify two critical roles of water in the setting of conventional GIC, and
discuss their influence on the properties of the set GIC.

CH

9

10–15

Na2O

7

1–5

Acrylic acid
unit
CH2
C

CH2 COOH

Itaconic acid
unit

CH2
CH

COOH
Maleic acid
unit

CH2

COOH

CH

COOH
Tricarboxylic
acid unit

COOH
CH2 COOH

• Figure 7-9 Structure of various types of alkanoic acids that make up
polyacids of glass-ionomer cements.

9

8
7

No (+) tartaric acid

3

BaO

10–20
14

10–20

SrO
P2O5

COOH

(+) Tartaric acid

La2O5

CaO

COOH

Viscosity

F

141

amorphous matrix of hydrated calcium and aluminum polysalts
containing fluoride ions. Figure 7-11 shows the stylized structure
of set GIC. Glass ionomers bond to tooth structure by chelation
of the carboxyl groups of the polyacrylic acids with the calcium in
the apatite of the enamel and dentin, like that of polycarboxylate
cement. Figure 7-12 is a micrograph of set GIC.
A specialized GIC known as a water-settable glass ionomer is formulated with freeze-dried polyacrylic acid blended with the glass
powder. The powder is mixed with water or an aqueous solution
containing tartaric acid. This type of GIC has an extended working time because additional time is needed to dissolve the dried
polyacrylic acid in water to initiate the acid–base reaction.

C

TABLE 7-5

Dental Cements

13

Time

11
5

1–5

1

5

• Figure 7-10 Effect of tartaric acid on the viscosity–time relationship for
a glass-ionomer cement during setting.

142

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Ca++
COO-

COO-

Ca++
COOCOO-

COO-

COOCa++
COO-

COO-

COOCa++

A

Al+++
COO- COO-

COOCOOCa++

• Figure 7-11 Diagram depicting the structure of a glass-ionomer cement. The solid blue particles represent unreacted glass particles, surrounded by the gel (light blue shaded structure), that form when Al3+ and
Ca2+ ions are leached from the glass as a result of attack by the polyacrylic
acid. The Ca2+ and Al3+ ions form polysalts with the COO− groups of the
polyacrylic acid to form a crosslinked structure. The carboxyl groups react
with the calcium in enamel and dentin.

• Figure 7-12 Photomicrograph of a set glass-ionomer cement showing
unreacted particles surrounded by the continuous matrix.

Clinical Manipulation
Before using GIC for luting, the surface of the prepared tooth
must be clean, uncontaminated by saliva or blood, and dry but
not desiccated deep into the tubules. A pumice slurry can be
used to remove the smear layer produced by cavity preparation.

B
• Figure 7-13 Prepared dentin surfaces. A, Freshly prepared surface with
smear layer. B, After cleansing with polyacrylic acid, the smear layer is
removed, yet the tubules remain plugged.

Alternatively, the tooth may be etched (conditioned) with phosphoric acid (34% to 37%) or an organic acid–like polyacrylic acid
(10% to 20%) for 10 to 20 seconds, followed by a 20- to 30-second water rinse. Figure 7-13 shows the smear layer and the smear
layer removal after a 10-second swabbing action with a 10% polyacrylic acid solution. For cases where the residual dentin thickness from the pulp is less than 0.5 mm, a calcium hydroxide or
tricalcium silicate liner is needed to ensure the GIC acidity does
not affect the pulp. The need for protection from the acidity of the
water-based cements is seen in Table 7-6. After 24 hours, the pH
values of these cements have risen from 2 to 6.
A nonabsorbent paper pad or a cool, dry glass slab may be
used for mixing GIC. A cool glass slab will retard the reaction,
which extends the working time. Like the zinc oxide cements, the
slab should not be colder than the dew point of the room temperature to avoid water condensation and dilution of the liquid.
The powder and liquid should be dispensed just before mixing is
begun; otherwise, evaporation of water increases the acidity of the
liquid. The powder should be rapidly spatulated into the liquid in
less than 45 seconds, or as prescribed in the instructions for use.
Normally, one-half of the powder is mixed into the liquid for 5
to 15 seconds; then the remaining powder is quickly added and
mixed by folding the cement on itself until a uniform and glossy
appearance is observed. A glossy appearance is critical because
this indicates that unreacted polyacid is present for bonding to
teeth. A dull appearance indicates that the setting reaction has
progressed too far.

CHAPTER 7

The viscosity of the mixed GIC varies widely among manufacturers from low to very high. The variations are achieved by
varying the particle-size distribution and P/L ratio. Coarser particles (about 50 μm average) are used for the viscous, restorative
indications, and fine glass particles (about 15 μm) are used for
cementing.
Some glass ionomers are supplied in capsules containing preproportioned powder and liquid (Figure 7-14). The capsules are
convenient and offer a consistent P/L ratio with less variation than
hand spatulation. The seal of the capsule is broken, and the capsule is placed in a triturator for the time and speed given by the
manufacturer. Some capsules are designed with a nozzle for injection directly into the prepared tooth cavity or fixed prosthesis.
With any glass-ionomer cement, a protective liner (i.e.,
Ca[OH]2) should be used if the preparation is estimated to be
closer than 0.5 mm to the pulp chamber. Glass-ionomer restoratives pose a lesser pulpal hazard than when used as luting cements
because the luting cements are mixed with a low P/L ratio and
remain acidic for a longer time. For luting, GIC is applied with
a plastic instrument to coat the entire intaglio surface of the
prosthesis before seating. Excess cement can be removed immediately after seating or when prescribed in the instructions for
use. No surface protection of the cement is needed during the

TABLE 7-6

pH Powder–Liquid Acid–Base of Cements
GLASS IONOMER

Time

Zinc
Phosphate

Zinc
Polycarboxylate

Polyacid
Liquid

Water
Settable

2 min

2.1

3.4

2.3

1.8

5 min

2.6

4.0

3.3

2.0

10 min

3.1

4.4

3.8

3.4

15 min

3.3

4.8

3.9

3.9

60 min

4.3

5.1

4.6

4.8

24 h

5.5

6.0

5.7

6.0

A

Dental Cements

143

initial setting, but a protective coating should be applied after the
removal of excess cement to avoid excess water sorption. For GIC
restorations, the surface of fresh GIC should be covered with a
plastic matrix for about 5 min to avoid excess water sorption during the initial setting. Otherwise, saliva will dilute the matrixforming cations and anions and destroy the hydrated matrix,
creating a weak restorative. When the plastic matrix is removed,
the surface must be protected with varnish or petrolatum while
the excess GIC is removed from the margins. Surface finishing
of GIC restorations must be carried out after the cement sets
and without excessive drying. Before dismissing the patient, GIC
restorations should again be coated with varnish or petrolatum.
If these recommended procedures are not followed, the surface
inevitably becomes chalky or crazed, such as in the restorative
shown in Figure 7-15.
Glass ionomers have served patients well because of their
dimensional stability and persistent fluoride release (Table 7-7),
lasting for 30 days after setting. Although in vitro studies have
shown the ability of the glass-ionomer restorations to inhibit
enamel and dentin demineralization, not all clinical studies have
confirmed the effectiveness of GIC over nonfluoridated materials. GIC restoratives are more vulnerable to wear and have lower
fracture toughness than composite restorations.

Metal-Reinforced Glass-Ionomer Cement
Metal powders have been incorporated into glass-ionomer
cements with the objective of faster setting and perhaps replacing amalgam. The metallic fillers can be silver alloy powder, such
as the alloys used in amalgams, termed alloy admix, or particles
of silver sintered to glass, known as cermet. Metal fillers make
the GIC grayish but more radiopaque. More fluoride is released
from the admix type because the alloy particles are not bonded
to the glass. Less fluoride is released from GI cermet because a
portion of the glass particle is coated with metal. All the procedures that apply to conventional GIC apply to metal-reinforced
GIC. The faster setting, adhesion, and fluoride release from
metal-reinforced GIC are useful for the following applications:

B

• Figure 7-14 Two powder–liquid type II restorative glass-ionomer ce-

• Figure 7-15 Crazed surface on glass-ionomer restorations that resulted

ments. A, Two-bottle system for hand mixing. B, Capsule for trituration
(GC Fuji Triage capsule).

from inadequate protection of the material during maturation. (Courtesy
Dr. Saulo Geradeli.)

144

PA RT I I

TABLE 7-7

Direct Restorative Materials

Cumulative Fluoride Release From
Various Glass-Ionomer Products

Fracture Toughness of Glass-Ionomer
Materials and Selected Restorative
Materials

TABLE 7-9

FLUORIDE RELEASED (μg)
Cement Type

Fracture Toughness (MPa⋅m1/2)

Type of Material

14 Days

30 Days

Cermet

200

300

Conventional GIC (luting)3

Type II glass
ionomer

440

650

Metal-modified GIC (admixed)5

0.30

Metal-modified GIC (cermet)5

0.51

Type I glass ionomer

470

700

Glass-ionomer liner
(conventional)

1000

1300

0.27–0.37

High-viscosity GIC6

0.45–0.72
4

Conventional GIC (restoration)

0.72

3

Glass-ionomer liner
(light-cured)

1200

1600

2

0.97–1.23

Compomer (restoration)

Alloy admix glass
ionomer (silver alloy
admix)

3350

4040

3

Resin cement

1.30
5

Resin-modified GIC (restoration)
1
2

Properties of Restorative Glass-Ionomer
Cements

1.37
0.97–1.60

Amalgam
TABLE 7-8

0.79–1.08

Resin-modified GIC (luting)

Hybrid composite

1.75–1.92

1

Lloyd CH, Adamson M, The fracture toughness (KIC) of amalgam. J Oral Rehabil 12:59, 1985.

2

Compressive
Strength (MPa)

Diametral Tensile
Strength (MPa)

Hardness
(KHN)

Glass ionomer
(Type II)

196–251

18–26

87–177

Cermet

176–212

19–22

30–45

High-viscosity
glass ionomer

301

24

108

Hybrid ionomer

202–306

20–48

64–85

(1) core buildups of teeth to be restored with cast crowns, (2)
restoratives on occlusal surfaces of primary molars with stainlesssteel crowns, and (3) cementing pins and other retentive forms.
The metal-reinforced GICs have limited use as an alternative to
amalgam or composite for posterior restorations because they
are weaker than resin composite core materials and other GICs
(Tables 7-8 and 7-9).

CRITICAL QUESTION
For the atraumatic restorative treatment technique, why is a high-viscosity
GIC the most appropriate material?

High-Viscosity Glass-Ionomer Cement
Atraumatic restorative treatment (ART) is a preventive and
restorative caries-management concept developed for dentistry in
regions of the world that do not have infrastructure such as electricity or piped water systems. Glass-ionomer cements are a natural choice for ART because of their adhesion and fluoride release.
High-viscosity GICs have been developed for this purpose with
smaller particle sizes and using a higher P/L ratio, which increases
the compressive strength (Table 7-8).
The clinical steps in the ART procedure are as follows: (1)
isolating the tooth with cotton rolls, (2) accessing the carious
lesion with hand instruments, (3) removing the soft tissue with an

Adrian Yap UJ, Chung SM, Chow WS, Tsai KT, Lim CT. Fracture resistance of compomer and
composite restoratives. Oper Dent 29:410, 2004.
3

Mitchell CA, Douglas WH, Cheng YS. Fracture toughness of conventional, resin-modified
glass–ionomer and composite luting cements. Dent Mater 15:7, 1999.
4

Bonilla E, Mardirossian G, Caputo AA. Fracture toughness of various core build-up materials.
J Prosthodon 9:14, 2000.
5
Kovarik RE, Muncy MV. Fracture toughness of resin-modified glass ionomers. Am J Dent
8:145, 1995.
6

Yamazaki T, Schricker SR, Brantley WA, Culbertson BM, Johnston W. Viscoelastic behavior
and fracture toughness of six glass-ionomer cements. J Prosthet Dent 96:266, 2006.
GIC, glass-ionomer cement.

excavator, (4) using a weak acid to condition the tooth (enhance
chemical bonding), and (5) placing a high-viscosity GIC using
finger pressure. The survival rate of partially and fully retained single-surface restorations on permanent teeth was reported as 88%
after 3 years. Another study followed restorations in two groups
of children: (1) high-viscosity GIC placed by the ART procedure
and (2) amalgam restorations. The cumulative survival rates after
6.3 years for ART and amalgam restorations were 66% and 57%,
demonstrating the usefulness of the ART procedure.
In a general practice office, electricity and water are available, but the same ART procedures can be used, augmented by
rotary instruments. One study compared the survival of highviscosity GIC using the ART procedure and conventional cavity
preparation with rotary instruments; no statistical difference was
observed between the two methods for class I preparations after
2 years. High-viscosity GICs have been used for core buildup,
primary tooth filling, non-stress-bearing restorations, and intermediate restorations. Short-term clinical studies confirmed that
high-viscosity GICs are suitable alternatives to amalgam in
class I and class II restorations in primary teeth. The capsulized
packaging of high-viscosity GIC (Figure 7-16) is convenient for
trituration.
Orthodontic bands are commonly cemented with GIC. Band
removal is easier with GICs because the use of a desiccating air
spray will weaken the cement. Glass ionomers have also been used
for pit and fissure sealing.

CHAPTER 7

145

Dental Cements

F
A
B
C
D

RelyX unicem capsule

E

• Figure 7-17 Commercial resin cements. A, A hand-mixing paste–paste
dual-cured system for temporary prostheses. B, A single-component
light-cured system for porcelain veneers. C, A paste–paste dual-cartridge
dispensing system that requires hand mixing. D, A powder–liquid capsule
system that is triturated. E, Two paste–paste dual-cartridge systems that
require static mixing; the top one requires a bonding agent, and the bottom one is self-adhesive. F, A liquid–liquid system.

Ketac Molar
Aplicap

GC Fuji IX
Capsule

• Figure 7-16 Two high-viscosity glass-ionomer cements.

Resin Cements
Resin cements are low-viscosity versions of resin-based composites.
These cements have a matrix of methacrylate monomers with dispersed fillers. Silane coating is required on the filler particle surfaces
to bond them to the monomers during polymerization for a durable, wear-resistant material. Polymerization of the resin cement can
be by self-, light- or dual-cured mechanisms. Most resin cements
for adhering devices are dual-cured materials. Dual- or self-cured
cements are used for prostheses made with medium- or high-opacity materials. For dual-cured cements, blue light initiates the curing
at the margins, and the self-cure progresses over time. The lightcured resin cements are indicated for cementing ceramic veneers
and direct bonding of ceramic or polymeric orthodontic brackets.
Because of light attenuation by the translucent prostheses, longer
light exposure is often required than with direct composites. However, the duration of light exposure should be minimized to avoid
heating the pulp. Many brands are available worldwide, which vary
widely in physical properties (Figure 7-17).

Composition and Setting
Resin cements, like resin-based composite, require the same bonding systems as resin-based composites for adhesion to teeth. Many
bonding systems are available, which vary in the steps needed.
The one-, two-, and three-component systems were discussed in
Chapter 6, Classifications by Clinical Steps. The one-component
system combines etching and priming. Bonding systems, like the
resin cements, may be self-, dual-, or light-cured materials, but all
incorporate at least one hydrophilic monomer. Thirty hydrophilic
monomers have been used, each with a methacrylate functionality,

to infiltrate the dentinal collagen and establish a micromechanical bond. Typically, these monomers are acidic or amide formulas in a water-miscible solution. Examples are HEMA, 4-META,
carboxylic acids, and an organophosphate (e.g., 10-methacryloyloxydecamethylene phosphoric acid [MDP]). For systems that
require a bonding agent, the resin primers partially infiltrate
the collagen fibrils that have been demineralized by acid etching.
The resin tags fill the space to reduce adverse pulpal responses
from the osteoblastic processes in the tubules.
Self-cured and dual-cured resin cements contain two components (base and catalyst) that require mixing. Components are
mixed on a paper pad for 20 to 30 seconds or two pastes can be
mixed when dispensed through a dual-chambered syringe through
a static mixing tip. Chemical activation is slower than with light
curing and provides extended working time. In dual-cured
cements, light-curing becomes dominate setting mechanism when
the cement is exposed to a curing light. The most esthetic resin
cements are light-cured only, and their color stability over time is
better than the dual-cured resins.
Some bonding agents are called “universal” bonding agents by
the manufacturer. Most universal bonding agents can be used with
total, self-, and selective etching before placement of dual- or selfcuring cements. Some universal adhesives release fluoride, and some
are two-part liquids that require mixing. The adhesive agent may
also be used as a primer on metal and ceramic-based restoratives.
Not all resin cement systems require a bonding agent. One
system based on 4-META uses liquid monomers and catalysts
without any traditional inorganic fillers and relies on mixing with
various amounts of polymer beads to adjust the viscosity of the
cement for intended applications. This cement eliminates the steps
of etching, priming, and bonding and allows the clinician to bond
prostheses directly to clean abutments. These cement systems
rely on modified dimethacrylate monomers with acid-containing
side chains, such as phosphoric acid, attached as pendant groups.
Upon contact with the tooth surface, the acidic group binds with
calcium in the hydroxyapatite to bond to the tooth.

146

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

The current self-adhesive resin cements are two-part systems:
liquid–powder and paste–paste. For the paste–paste system, one
component is composed of the conventional monomers used in
resin-based composites and acid-leachable fillers, similar to those
used in GICs. The other component contains acid-functional
monomers (Figure 6-4) to achieve demineralization and bonding
to the tooth surface, with inert fillers. Initiators for polymerization
are distributed between components. Only the acidic monomers
on the surface of the mixture contribute to etching and bonding
of the cement to tooth surface, as in GICs. The remaining acidity
of the mixture is neutralized by the leachable glass. This acid–
base reaction constitutes the recurrent setting reaction and releases
fluoride. The setting mechanisms also qualify them as dual-cured
materials.
The self-adhesive resin cements usually show lower bond
strength values than non-self-adhesive resin cements in microtensile or shear testing. Unlike phosphoric acid, the acidic monomers
that etch and promote bonding of the self-adhesive resin cements
do not etch enamel. Therefore for enamel bonding, phosphoric
acid etching is needed.

silicate-embedded area that can be treated with silane to improve
bonding metals with resin cements. The bond-strength values are
similar for metals prepared by grit blasting and electrochemical
etching. Some bonding systems include a metal primer to promote adhesion. Oxide formation on the surface of base metals
increases the bond strength when a resin cement containing MDP
or 4-META is used. However, high-noble-metal dental alloys lack
stable surface oxides. The bonding of noble-metal prostheses is
enhanced by a thin (about 0.5 μm) layer of tin electroplated on
the prosthesis by a dental laboratory. When heated, a layer of tin
oxide forms, which is more adhesive to the cement.

Clinical Manipulation and Evaluation
Liquid–powder formulations are often packaged in capsule form
and mixed by trituration (Figure 7-17, D). Two-paste resin systems are often sold with a static mixer tube to use on the end of
a two-barrel syringe; the static mixer dispenses a mixed cement
(Figure 7-17, E). Static mixing or trituration of capsules has largely
replaced hand mixing. Static mixing is convenient and does not
mix air into the cement, unlike hand mixing. The mechanism of
static mixing is discussed in Chapter 13, Manipulation of Impression Materials.
For bonding inlays or crowns, a separate phosphoric acid–
etching of the enamel margins improves marginal sealing and
adaptation. However, phosphoric acid decreases bond strength to
dentin because the viscous cements cannot penetrate a demineralized collagenous matrix created by phosphoric acid. However,
the self-adhesive resin cements have fairly strong bonds to dentin,
despite the lack of formation of the classical hybrid layer shown
for enamel bonding.
The chemical and physical properties of self-adhesive resin
cements reported in the literature show that self-adhesive resin
cements may be expected to perform as well as other resin-based
and non-resin-based dental cements; however, few long-term
studies are available. Nonetheless, the handling properties of these
materials appear to be excellent, and their acceptance by the profession is increasing.
The monomers in uncured resin cements are irritating to the
pulp. To prevent the infiltration of irritants, pulp protection with
a liner is important when the thickness of the remaining dentin is
less than 0.5 mm. The procedure for preparing the tooth remains
the same for each resin system, but the treatment of the prosthesis
differs depending on the prosthesis material, as described next.

Ceramic Prostheses
Early ceramic prostheses often fractured when nonadhesively
luted with the traditional zinc oxide–based cements. The bonding agents of resin cement are now used to fill the surface flaws
in the ceramic and have reduced the fracture of ceramic prostheses. Resin cement may be partially seen through a translucent
ceramic prosthesis, such as ceramic veneer, and therefore influence
the esthetics. Usually several shades of light-cured resin cements
are available that enable the clinician to optimize esthetics with
ceramic restorations. Some products include water-soluble tryin gels with the same shades as the cements. The try-in gels are
applied like a cement, and then the prosthesis is provisionally
seated and examined in situ for esthetic appearance. This process
can be repeated with various try-in gel shades until the clinician
and patient are satisfied with the esthetic appearance. After the
cement shade has been selected, the try-in paste must be thoroughly removed from the tooth and the prosthesis. The cementation process is completed using a cement with the same shade as
the selected try-in gel.
A variety of ceramic materials are used for prosthodontics,
and they vary in composition and translucency. The porcelain
and lithia disilicate materials contain glass, so these prostheses are
prepared by etching with hydrofluoric acid (HF), usually by the
dental laboratory. Then the etched ceramic is silanated to enhance
adhesion to the resin cement. Zirconia and alumina restoratives
are silica-free, acid-resistant, polycrystalline ceramics. Without the
silicate glass phase, HF etching and silane application are not useful for bonding. These polycrystalline ceramic restorations must
be air abraded with alumina (not silica), and then coated with a
bonding agent containing MDP. Grit blasting with silicate-coated
alumina particles deposits silica on the zirconia or alumina surface
to help with silanization and bonding.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does the treatment of the surface of the prosthesis differ by the type of
resin cement used?

Metallic Prostheses
When bonding a base metal prosthesis, the intaglio should
be roughened by electrochemical etching or grit blasting. Air
blasting of metal surfaces with silicate-coated particles leaves a

Polymeric Prostheses
Polymer-based prostheses, including polymeric veneers, must be
grit-based on the intaglio to increase the roughness for mechanical
adhesion. Some polymer prostheses systems have a special adhesive to be used for bonding, based on the same monomer that is
used to fabricate the prosthesis. A 30-min surface treatment with
special adhesive must be allowed for adequate penetration of the
adhesive into the polymer prostheses before cementing.

Orthodontic Brackets
Mechanical and chemical adhesion to metal orthodontic devices
and teeth are important for the prevention of premature debonding. Bonding of orthodontic brackets requires proper isolation
and etching of the enamel surface to secure the bond between
the tooth and the bracket. The tooth-facing side of the bracket
requires some means of mechanical retention, such as the metal
mesh of the metal bracket or other retentive dimples or ridges

CHAPTER 7

on ceramic or polymer brackets. Additional surface treatment
depends on the class of materials used in the brackets. Ceramic
bracket bases are commonly precoated with an organosilane, like
those used to bond inorganic fillers within the resin matrix of
resin-based composites. Polycarbonate brackets are primed with
a solvent containing methylmethacrylate monomer. When treatment is completed, removal of the appliances should occur at the
tooth–cement interface or, less preferably, at the cement–bracket
interface, but not within the tooth enamel.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the advantages of incorporating polymerizing resin in the GICs?

Combination Cements
Cements may have unique properties created by substituting or
incorporating ingredients. For instance, fluoride release and curing on command (light curing) are desirable for clinicians. Some
noted developments in combination cements are discussed in this
section.

Resin-Modified Glass-Ionomer Cement
RMGIs are also referred to as hybrid ionomers (Figure 7-18). These
cements contain water-soluble polymerizable monomers in a liquid,
usually a water solution of polyacrylic acid, 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA), and polyacrylic acid–modified methacrylate. Catalysts, such as diphenyliodonium chloride (DPICI), are included.
This type of cement has a longer working time and is less sensitive
to water contamination than conventional glass-ionomer cement.
The monomers in hybrid glass-ionomer cements make the
cements more translucent than glass ionomer and therefore more
suitable for restorative indications. The fluoride release and the
higher diametral tensile strengths over glass-ionomer cements
(Table 7-8) make the hybrid GICs more desirable for restoratives.
The hybrid ionomers have a higher tensile strength that is attributed
to their lower elastic modulus imparted by the resin component.
As a powder–liquid system, the liquid component comprises
lower water and carboxylic acid contents than that of GIC. The
powder contains fluoroaluminosilicate glass particles and initiators
for light curing and/or chemical curing monomers in the liquid.

A

B

Dental Cements

147

The incorporation of polymerization of the methacrylate groups
makes RMGI a dual-cured cement. The acid–base reaction begins
upon mixing but continues after the monomer polymerizes. A
tri-cured cement has both chemical and light activation that are
included with the hybrid cement. The carboxylate groups in hybrid
ionomer cements bond to tooth structure as in other GICs, and
the monomers form an amorphous layer at the cement–dentin
interface, with some resin infiltration into the etched dentin for
added adhesion. Higher bond strengths have been measured for
hybrid ionomer cements than for conventional glass ionomers.
The higher bonding to teeth may occur because of better micromechanical interlocking to a roughened tooth surface. The adhesion
of the GIC component of hybrid ionomers to dentin reduces the
probability of gap formation at gingival margins. This feature helps
compensate for the polymerization shrinkage of an overlying resin
composite restoration placed on a hybrid ionomer cavity base.
Clinical indications for hybrid ionomers include cavity liners/
bases, fissure sealants, core buildups, adhesive for orthodontic
brackets, repair material for damaged amalgam cores or cusps, and
restoratives. Direct pulp capping is contraindicated. For any indication, surface conditioning of the tooth structure with a mild acid
is important for bonding the resin component. Placing a hybrid
ionomer, and then a resin-based composite is the so-called “sandwich technique.” This technique combines the fluoride release of
a glass ionomer and the esthetics of a composite restoration and
is recommended for class II and V composite restorations when
individual patients are at a moderate to high risk for caries.
Low-viscosity hybrid ionomers or conventional GICs have
been used for fissure/sealant indications. The retention rate of
glass-ionomer sealants was poor after 1 year, but patches of glassionomer cement that remained within the fissures were effective
in preventing caries.
Some hybrid ionomer cements are marketed based on the unique
filler properties and their ability to flow or to not flow, the latter allowing “stacking.” Marketing terms such as “S-PRG” and “Giomer” are
unique terms from manufacturers that indicate a glass-ionomer filler.
Some hybrid ionomer cements also contain nonreactive filler particles, which lengthen the working time, improve the early strength,
and reduce sensitivity to moisture during setting. The use of nonreactive filler particles along with less carboxylic acid available for bonding
to tooth structure; therefore a dentin bonding system is needed.

C

D

E

• Figure 7-18 Representative resin-modified glass-ionomer cements. A and B, Two-bottle powder–liquid
system. C, Photac Fil Quick Aplicap. D, GC Fuji Plus Capsule. E, Ketac Nano, a paste–paste system using
static mixing.

148

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

A few reports of adverse effects have been attributed to hybrid
ionomers that include HEMA in the formula. HEMA can cause
pulpal inflammation and allergic contact dermatitis. Therefore
hybrid ionomers are not as biocompatible as conventional glass
ionomers. The HEMA in hybrid ionomers increases water absorption over time, with concurrent expansion of up to 8 vol%. The
expansion has been linked to the fracture of all-ceramic crown restorations when hybrid ionomers were used for core buildup or luting cement. Dental personnel may be at risk from adverse effects
such as contact dermatitis and other immunological responses.

bonding, compomers are also used for treating class I and class II
lesions in the primary dentition because of their fluoride-releasing
potential. Compomers are finished just like resin composites.
In a 24-month clinical study of fissure sealants, compomers
performed as well as composite resin sealants, although their marginal integrity was less. Compomers perform as well as composite
resins for class I and II restorations. However, the color stability
of compomers is a problem, likely caused by water absorption and
staining by food. Compomers have been used for bonding orthodontic bands and brackets because of their adhesion to metal,
fast curing, and fluoride release.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does compomer differ from resin-based composite?

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the setting mechanism of calcium aluminate glass-ionomer cement?

Compomer
Compomer is a light-cured material that integrates the fluoridereleasing capability of glass ionomers with the durability of composite resins in a one-paste restorative resin. As a restoration,
compomer restorations perform better than resin-modified glass
ionomers but are inferior to hybrid composites. They contain
nonreactive inorganic filler particles, reactive silicate glass particles, sodium fluoride, a polyacid-modified monomer (e.g., di-ester
of 2-hydroxyl methacrylate with butane carboxylic acid [TCB]),
and photo activators. Compomers are usually one-paste materials
for restorative applications (Figure 7-19).
Single-component compomer cements are water-free and are
packaged in moisture-resistant blister packs. Compomers set by a
polymerization reaction, and then absorb water from the saliva to
initiate the slow acid–base reaction between the acidic functional
groups and silicate glass particles. The product of the acid–base
reaction becomes the source of fluoride release. However, restorative compomers release less fluoride than GICs and hybrid ionomers. Compomer pastes require a dentin-bonding agent prior
to their placement as a restorative because they do not contain
water to be self-adhesive like GICs or hybrid ionomers. The tooth
structure should be etched and followed by the dentin-bonding
agent before placing the compomer. The bond strength of paste
compomers to tooth structure using a dentin-bonding agent is
like that of hybrid ionomers. The restorative compomer materials are mainly used in low-stress-bearing areas, such as class III
and V cavities, as an alternative to glass-ionomer restoratives or
resin-based composites. Together with one-bottle adhesives for

Calcium Aluminate Glass-Ionomer Cement
An innovative self-adhesive bioactive cement combines GIC with
calcium aluminate cement. The unique cement is indicated for
luting of fixed dental prostheses. The main ingredients in the
powder are monocalcium aluminate, polyacrylic acid, tartaric
acid, strontium-fluoro-alumino-glass, and strontium fluoride.
The liquid component contains 99.6% water and 0.4% additives
for controlling setting. The polyacrylic acid (PAA) functions as
in a conventional GIC, crosslinked by Ca2+ ions from the soluble
glass and the Ca-aluminate. The glass-ionomer reaction is responsible for setting time and strength. The working and setting time
are reported to be 2 and 5 min, and the film thickness is low, 15 ±
4 μm. The resulting hydrated material is a composite of hydrated
calcium aluminate cement and a crosslinked polyacrylate polymer. Setting expansion of 0.4% has been reported, although in
vitro studies where the cement was set inside glass tubes did not
show breakage. This amount of expansion was considered acceptable. The monocalcium aluminate absorbs water, which is reputed
to impart bioactivity, forming hydroxyapatite at the margins of
the cement and in contact with the pulp. A microstructural study
showed the formation of hydroxyapatite over this cement in a
phosphate buffer solution. The cement has long-term stability
and strength for crown cementation. Results of a 3-year clinical
study of 38 crowns and bridges revealed a favorable performance
of this cement. The cement is packaged in powder–liquid systems
for hand mixing or capsules using triturator.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the materials and techniques needed to overcome the root canal
system environment and create a hermetic seal with endodontic obturation
systems?

Endodontic Sealers

• Figure 7-19 Typical compomer materials. A, A powder–liquid system.
B, Two single-paste systems. C, A paste–paste dual cartridge using static
mixing. All systems are light-curable.

Endodontic sealers are specialized versions of dental cement
(Figure 7-20) that are used during obturation with gutta-percha
to fill voids and promote a close seal between the core and the
dentinal walls of the canal, preventing or minimizing leakage,
entombing residual microorganisms, and preferably filling areas
of the root canal system that are inaccessible by instrumentation. The requirements for the ideal root canal sealer are listed in
Box 7-1, and the ISO 6876 requirements are shown in Table 7-2.
Several dental cements have been adapted for this specialized use;
the most popular are ZOE-based sealers. ZOE sealers are inexpensive, are slow setting, and have a long history of acceptable clinical

CHAPTER 7

• BOX 7.1

• Figure 7-20 Root canal sealers. The two materials in the back are
powder–liquid systems. The dual-cartridge syringe in the foreground is a
paste–paste system with static mixing tip.

use. However, the newer epoxy-based sealers are radiopaque and
more biocompatible than ZOE. Polyvinylsiloxane (PVS) sealers
are also available as powder–liquid and two-paste systems. Glassionomer cement and resin-modified GICs have also been used.
A filled biodegradable thermoplastic polymer, Resilon (Resilon
Research LLC, Madison, CT), along with a resin-based sealer,
Epiphany (Pentron Clinical Technologies, Wallingford, CT), was
introduced in the 1990s. This system claimed to have less leakage than the traditional gutta-percha with sealer but performed
poorly over time as a result of degradation of the polymer matrix.
Another system uses gutta-percha cones that are coated with a
proprietary resin coating (EndoREZ, Ultradent, South Jordan,
UT) for use in combination with a methacrylate-based, dualcured resin sealer and no dentin-bonding agent. In this case, the
endodontic seal is dependent on the penetration of the hydrophilic sealer into the dentinal tubules and lateral canals following
removal of the smear layer.
In the long, narrow space of the root canal, the application of
any bonding system to form a uniform interface is challenging.
For example, in bonding systems that contain volatile solvents,
evaporation might be hindered. The canal anatomy is not only
problematic to adhesive root canal obturation but also for the
bonding of prefabricated posts. A further problem is that some
irrigating solutions (e.g., sodium hypochlorite) and intracanal
medicaments have adverse effects on root canal dentin collagen
and the longevity of endodontic bonding. Unlike other cements,
endodontic sealers are not light-cured because of the inability to
complete the curing in the depths of a root canal (~2 cm), the
complex anatomy of intercommunicating canals, and the inaccessible locations often in the posterior.
The configuration of the root canal also presents a high “C-factor”
(Chapter 5, Cure Shrinkage and Managing Shrinkage Stress) because
a nonbonded area of the cement layer exists within the bonded canal.
Thus a resin endodontic sealer is subjected to severe stresses induced
by the sealer’s polymerization shrinkage during setting. Debonding
and gaps may occur between the sealer and dentin wall or in between
the solid core material and the sealer along the periphery of the root
canal obturation.
The newest category of endodontic sealers incorporates bioactive cements, such as Total Fill, Edge Endo, iRoot ES, and
Endosequence BC Sealer. These materials are a single paste of
tri-/dicalcium silicate powders suspended in organic liquids. Such

Dental Cements

149

Endodontic Sealer Criteria

Endodontic sealers should have the following characteristics:
• Make a hermetic seal
• Be tacky when mixed to provide good adhesion with the canal wall
when set
• Contain particles of powder that are very ne so that they can mix easily
with liquid, where appropriate
• Be radiopaque for visualization on a radiograph
• Not shrink upon setting
• Not discolor tooth structure
• Be bacteriostatic or at least not encourage bacterial growth
• Set slowly
• Be insoluble in tissue uids
• Be well tolerated by the periapical tissue (and also not provoke an
immune response, be mutagenic, or carcinogenic)
• Be soluble in common solvents, if necessary, to remove the root canal
filling

sealers have a low setting expansion of 0.2% as a result of hydration-forming hydroxyapatite. Many sealers have shrinkage of 6%
or higher, which leads to interface separation, whereas even a small
expansion promotes hermetic interface sealing.
Resin-based sealers with bioactive fillers dispersed in the resin
may not have the same bioactive effect as the single-paste sealer.
The resins coat the bioactive particles and interfere with the release
of calcium and hydroxide ions.

Tri-/Dicalcium Silicate Cement
Dental cements based on tri- and dicalcium silicates (tricalcium
silicate, for short) are beneficial because of their sealing ability,
biocompatibility, and bioactivity. These cements are less cytotoxic than glass-ionomer cements or polymeric materials. These
hydraulic cements need water to set, which is ever present in the
oral cavity. The first tri-/dicalcium silicate product was called mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) and later, bioceramic. These names
are widely used in dentistry to denote the tri-/dicalcium silicates
products (Figure 7-21).
The essential components of these bioactive cements are tricalcium silicate and dicalcium silicate ceramic powders blended
with inert radiopaque powders, usually bismuth oxide, zirconia,
calcium tungstate, barium zirconate, or tantalum oxide. Minor
phases of tricalcium aluminate, calcium sulfate (Table 7-10), calcium carbonate, and tetracalcium aluminoferrite are sometimes
present, depending on the brand. The ferrite compound makes
the cement gray.
Tricalcium silicate cement sets by reaction with water to form
a rigid matrix of calcium silicate hydrates with embedded calcium
hydroxide. The hydration starts on the surface of the tricalcium
silicate particles and gradually penetrates inward, although never
completely. Setting times for these products vary from a few minutes to 2 hours for the original ProRoot MTA. The long setting
time, washout, and high price were major drawbacks of early
products. Improved products are now available with shorter setting times based on finer particle sizes and modified water-based
liquids containing calcium chloride, polycarboxylate, or various
water-soluble organic materials.
Products are available for a range of indications, from pulpal
to periradicular contact. The primary indications are for pulp and
periradicular tissue contact. The tri-/dicalcium silicate cements

150

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

A

B

D

E

C

F

• Figure 7-21 An assortment of tricalcium silicate products with various packaging for the bioactive powder. A, Sachets. B, Bottles. C, Amalgam-type cartridges. D, Ampoules. E, Vials. F, Paste.

TABLE 7-10

Phases in Tricalcium Silicate Cement
Before Hydration

Ceramic Phases

Wt%

Tricalcium silicate 3(CaO)⋅SiO2

45–75

Dicalcium silicate 2(CaO)⋅SiO2

7–32

Radiopaque filler (Bi2O3, ZrO2, CaWO4,Ta2O5)

20–55

A

Minor phases, optional
Tricalcium aluminate 3(CaO)⋅Al2O3

0–13

Tetracalcium aluminoferrite
4(CaO)⋅Al2O3⋅Fe2O3

0–18

Gypsum CaSO4⋅2H2O

2–10

Calcium carbonate (CaCO3)

<10

B

C

are vulnerable to acid dissolution; therefore periodontal and
coronal usage is only temporary. The cement sets over a wide
range of P/L ratios, roughly between 4:1 and 2:1. The P/L ratio
can be varied to suit the case and the clinician’s preference. The
powder should be dispensed onto a glass slab (Figure 7-22, A),
with a drop of the liquid next to the powder. A medium-stiffness
metal spatula should be used to bring powder to liquid and spatulate until a putty-like consistency is reached (Figure 7-22, B).
The mixture can be formed into a “roll” with gloved fingers
(Figure 7-22, C), and then the spatula can be used to cut off small
sections for insertion into a pulpotomy preparation, a root-end
filling of a perforation site, a cavity preparation, or a pulp exposure, such as a pulpotomy. A plastic filling instrument or a small
amalgam carrier is commonly used to transport the cement into

• Figure 7-22 Mixing of mineral trioxide aggregate. A, Dispense powder
and liquid. B, Bring the powder to liquid and spatulate until a putty-like
consistency. C, Roll to the desire shape for usage.

the surgical location, and the cement is then gently compacted. If
the mixed cement is not used immediately, a moist gauze “tent”
can be placed over the material to prevent dehydration. If the
mixture appears dry, usually more liquid can be added to prolong
the working time.
The pH of MTA rises rapidly after contact with water by
releasing calcium hydroxide as a reaction product. The calcium
hydroxide in the set tricalcium silicate makes this material antibacterial, antifungal, and bioactive. That is, the high pH on the
surface causes the precipitation of hydroxyapatite crystals on the
surface in vitro or in vivo. MTA should not be allowed to stay in
contact with the mucosa because the high pH can cause a superficial lesion. Excess material should be washed out of the oral cavity.
The surficial layer of hydroxyapatite that forms in vivo causes a

CHAPTER 7

chain of healing reactions to the bone-like surface, which does
not appear as a foreign body to the cells. Reparative dentin forms
in apposition to the tri-/dicalcium silicates in pulpal indications.
Cementum-like layers form over the tricalcium silicate used to
fill perforations, resorption defects, or root ends. When the tri-/
dicalcium silicate materials set, the dimensional change is < 0.1%
expansion, which is highly desirable for sealing, unlike polymers
that shrink.
New bioactive, hydraulic paste products have been introduced. For these, the tri-/dicalcium silicate cement and
radiopaque powders are suspended in organic liquids. When
used in vivo, the organic liquid diffuses away from the powder, and water diffuses inward to cause setting. Such onecomponent paste products are being used for pulpal and
periradicular containing cements, including endodontic sealing
with gutta-percha.
Other hydraulic cements are likely to be developed that incorporate calcium monoaluminate to make a more acid-resistant
cement suitable for infected (acidic) sights. Also, the reaction
of silica hydrate (silicic acid) with calcium hydroxide (pozzolan
reaction) will be used for new products to create a hydrated silica
cement.

Calcium Phosphate Cements
Calcium phosphate cements are combinations of dicalcium
phosphate dihydrate, dicalcium phosphate anhydrous, tricalcium phosphate, and tetracalcium phosphate that are mixed
with an aqueous solution saturated with calcium phosphate,
an organic acid, or a solution of polymers. An example is
Sankin Apatite Root Canal Sealer (Dentsply Sankin, Tokyo,
Japan).
The cement pastes gradually set and form hydroxyapatite. The
calcium phosphate phases dissolve in the liquid and precipitate a
less soluble calcium phosphate, which “sets” at 37 °C, with some
poorly crystalline hydroxyapatite being formed. The cements
are suitable bone-substitute materials because they are gradually resorbed. They can sometimes be used in place of granular
hydroxyapatite. However, their washout and low strength are
problematic.
Experimental formulas of calcium phosphate base and liner
products have been made that include polymerizable resins and
additives in the liquid phase. The resins allow water diffusion that
facilitates the conversion of calcium phosphate to hydroxyapatite.
Clinical studies show that the caries-affected dentin underneath
this cement had significantly more calcium and phosphorus content to a depth of 30 μm, and the mineral content was in the range
of healthy dentin after 3 months. Research continues to investigate such biocompatible materials for pulpal protection and endodontic indications.

Summary
No single cement is applicable for all indications in dentistry. Prudent dentists have several types of cements in their armamentarium. Manufacturers’ formulas and processes dictate most cement
characteristics, but the clinician has some control over the handling, setting, and to some degree, the biocompatibility through
the mixing ratios or technique.
The historic zinc phosphate cement has fallen out of use, but
ZOE cements are used for luting, for temporary restorations, and
for retaining fixed prostheses on implant-supported abutments,

Dental Cements

151

which facilitates retrievability of the prostheses. Zinc polycarboxylate cements are noninjurious to the pulp and adhesive to tooth
structure, but they are not commonly used because of their short
working time and viscous nature.
Glass-ionomer cements work well for orthodontic bands and
cementing of metal crowns on primary teeth. The fluoride-releasing capability makes glass-ionomer cement the material of choice
for the replacement of restorations that have failed because of
recurrent caries and for patients living in areas where fluoridated
drinking water is not available. A primary disadvantage of glassionomer cements is the slow maturing process that is required to
develop their highest strength.
Resin cements are insoluble in oral fluids, and their fracture
toughness is higher than that of other cements. Resin cements
can be used for all types of cementation, most notably for prostheses with poor retention, and for all-ceramic prostheses where
the esthetic demand is very high. Resin cements require bonding
agents to be effective. Etching may be required to obtain a strong
attachment to enamel with bonding agents. Self-etching and selfadhesive resin cements are now available.
Hybrid ionomer cements are used as a liner, fissure sealant, and
base material and in core buildups and orthodontic band cementation. Compomers are used for cementing metallic prostheses
and some restorative indications. The durability of compomers is
inferior to that of resin-based composites; thus they should only
be used for low-stress areas.
Glass-ionomer, polycarboxylate, and resin cements adhere
chemically and physically to the surrounding surfaces. Excess
cement should be removed as soon as the seating is completed
to prevent adhesion to the exterior of the prostheses or surrounding teeth. A separating medium, such as petroleum jelly, spread
on external and surrounding surfaces inhibits cement adherence,
making cement removal easier when these cements fully set.
The important properties of cements for adhering devices are
summarized in Table 7-11. A high elastic modulus was important
for gold alloy restorations, and a lower elastic modulus is needed
under ceramic restorations.
Pulp capping and cavity liners/base materials are important for
pulpal health and protection from acidic cements. GICs elicit a
greater pulpal reaction than ZOE cement but less than zinc phosphate cement. Calcium hydroxide and tricalcium silicate products are important for direct or indirect pulpal protection. These
bioactive materials initiate subgingival or pulpal tissue healing,
although the tricalcium silicates are superseding calcium hydroxide products, especially for pulpotomies.
Calcium aluminate–glass-ionomer cement relies on the GIC to
establish the early strength and the hydration of calcium aluminate
for final properties and bioactivity. New formulas of cements are
anticipated, based on calcium aluminates and pozzolanic cements.
The latter cement is based on silicic acid reacting with calcium
hydroxide, often called Roman cement.
Specialty areas of dentistry, such as orthodontics and endodontics, use variations of the cements discussed to achieve the unique
needs for their procedures. Endodontic cement formulas include
ZOE, epoxy, polyvinyl siloxane, and now the tricalcium silicates.
The tricalcium silicates are used surgically and nonsurgically,
depending on the viscosity of the cement used.
Cements for dentistry continue to evolve and improve in
their insolubility, sealing, esthetics, bonding, and durability.
Filler particles, usually glass, continue to move to smaller sizes.
Nanoparticles is now a commonly used term, which usually means
silica particles are included, but the material may include other

152

PA RT I I

TABLE 7-11

Direct Restorative Materials

Properties of Cements for Affixing Devices

Cement Type

Setting Time
(min)

Film Thickness
(μm)

24-h Compressive
Strength (MPa)

24-h Diametral Tensile
Strength (MPa)

Elastic Modulus
(GPa)

Solubility in
Water (wt%)

Zinc phosphate

5.5

20

104

5.5

13.5

0.06

ZOE* (type I)

4.0–10

25

6–28

—

—

0.04

9.5

25

55

4.1

5.0

0.05

ZOE + polymer (type II)

6.0–10

32

48

4.1

2.5

0.08

Zinc polycarboxylate

6.0

21

55

6.2

5.1

0.06

Glass ionomer

7.0

24

86

6.2

7.3

1.25

2.0–4.0

<25

70–172

—

2.1–3.1

0–0.01

ZOE–EBA (type II)

Resin

EBA, ethoxybenzoic acid; ZOE, zinc oxide–eugenol.

fillers that have some portion of particles finer than 0.1 μm (100
nm). New adhesive polymers and refinement of the fillers will
continue to help dentists minimize tissue destruction and maximize preservation.

Acknowledgment

Selected Readings

Primus CM, Tay FR, Niu L-N: Bioactive tri/dicalcium silicate cements
for treatment of pulpal and periapical tissues, Acta Biomater 96:35–
54, 2019.
A thorough review of the tricalcium silicate cements.
ten Cate JW, Featherstone JD: Mechanistic aspect of the interactions between
fluoride and dental enamel, Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 2:283–296, 1991.
This article critically reviews the information about tooth-fluoride
interactions, both from laboratory and clinical studies.
Tyas MJ: Milestones in adhesion: Glass-ionomer cements, J Adhes Dent
5:259–266, 2003.
An excellent review of the conventional and hybrid glass ionomer cements.
Weiner R: Liners and bases in general dentistry, Aust Dent J 56(Suppl 1):11–
22, 2011.
This review article discusses the use of liners and bases and the types of
materials that are available to the restorative dentist.
Wilson AD, McLean JW: Glass Ionomer Cements, Chicago, 1988, Quintessence Publishing Co.
This book provides an in-depth discussion of the evolution and chemistry of various GIC formulations.

Ambard AJ, Mueninghoff L: Calcium phosphate cement: Review of
mechanical and biological properties, J Prosthodont 15:321–328, 2006.
This article reviewed literature regarding the use of calcium phosphate
up to 2003.
Darvell BW: Materials Science for Dentistry, ed 10, Duxford, UK, 2018,
Woodhead Publishing.
An excellent resource on chemistry of dental materials.
Davidson CL, Mjör IA: Advances in Glass Ionomer Cements, Chicago,
1999, Quintessence.
Fourteen chapters covering such topics as chemistry, physical properties, bonding, fluoride release, and clinical applications.
Jefferies SR: Bioactive and biomimetic restorative materials: a comprehensive review, Part I, J Esthet Restor Dent 26:14–26, 2014.
An informative paper on use of calcium aluminate cement for
crowns.
Nicholson JW: Polyacid-modified composite resins (“compomers”) and
their use in clinical dentistry, Dent Mater 23:615–622, 2007.
Chemistry and properties of compomers designed for use in clinical
dentistry and reviews the literature in this area.

Figure 7-2 was generously provided by Dr. Carlos Alberto de
Souza Costa of São Paulo State University, Brazil.

Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Ambard AJ, Mueninghoff L: Calcium phosphate cement: Review of
mechanical and biological properties, J Prosthodont 15:321–328,
2006.
This article reviewed literature regarding the use of calcium phosphate
up to 2003.
Balderamos LP, O’Keefe KL, Powers JM: Color accuracy of resin cements
and try-in paste, Int J Prosthodont 10:111–115, 1997.
Color reading by instrument showed there were significant differences
in color between resin cements and their corresponding try-in pastes
by instrument reading.
Berekally TL, Makinson OF, Pietrobon RA: A microscopic examination
of bond surfaces in failed electrolytically etched cast metal fixed prostheses, Aust Dent J 38:229–237, 1993.
The study showed clinical failure of debonded electrolytically etched
[Maryland] bridge retainers occurred mostly at the of resin failure
within the cement layer close to the enamel-resin interface.
Bonilla ED, Mardirossian G, Caputo AA: Fracture toughness of various
core build-up materials, J Prosthodont 9:14–18, 2000.
Chaar MS, Att W, Strub JR: Prosthetic outcome of cement-retained
implant-supported fixed dental restorations: A systematic review, J
Oral Rehabil 38:697–711, 2011.
Cement-retained implant-supported fixed restorations are a reliable
and effective option for single crowns and short-span FDPs but did
not provide accurate information about the ideal type of cement for
stability and retrievability.
Costa CAS, Mesas AN, Hebling J: Pulp response to direct capping with
an adhesive system, Am J Dent 13:81–87, 2000.
This paper reported the effect of direct pulp capping with an adhesive
system and a zinc-oxide eugenol cement [ZOE] in rat molar teeth.
Both materials allowed pulp repair.
Crisp S, Kent BE, Lewis BG, et al: Glass ionomer cement formulations.
II. The synthesis of novel polycarboxylic acids, J Dent Res 59:1055,
1980.
The synthesis of many polycarboxylic acids is reported. A copolymer
of acrylic and itaconic acids was found to combine several favorable
characteristics.
Darvell BW: Materials Science for Dentistry, ed 10, Duxford UK, 2018,
Woodhead Publishing.
An excellent resource on chemistry of dental materials.
Darvell BW, Wu RC: “MTA”—a hydraulic silicate cement: Review
update and setting reaction, Dent Mater 27:407–422, 2011.
A very good review of tricalcium silicate materials.
Davidson CL, Mjör IA: Advances in Glass Ionomer Cements, Chicago,
1999, Quintessence.
Fourteen chapters covering such topics as chemistry, physical properties, bonding, fluoride release, and clinical applications.
Dickens-Venz SH, Takagi S, Chow LC, et al: Physical and chemical
properties of resin-reinforced calcium phosphate cements, Dent Mater
10:100–106, 1994.
This article described the formulation of a resin modified calcium
phosphate cement and the evaluation of properties.
Forsten L: Fluoride release from a glass ionomer cement, Scand J Dent Res
85:503–504, 1977.
The article measured release of fluoride from a glass ionomer cement
and a silicate cement. The fluoride release during the first 2 weeks
was more than those during the subsequent 5 weeks. Slightly more
fluoride was released from the glass ionomer cement than from the
silicate.
Frencken JE, Taifour D, van’t Hof MA: Survival of ART and amalgam
restorations in permanent teeth of children after 6.3 years, J Dent Res
85:622–626, 2006.
For a total of 1117 single- and multiple-surface restorations made
of amalgam and ART GIC, the restorations produced with the ART
approach survived longer than those produced with amalgam.
Goldman M: Fracture properties of composite and glass ionomer dental
restorative materials, J Biomed Mater Res 19:771–783, 1985.

The investigation found metal-reinforced GIC exhibited a lower fracture toughness than that of composite resins—a reflection of brittle
material.
Jefferies SR: Bioactive and biomimetic restorative materials: a comprehensive review. Part I, J Eesthet Restor Dent 26:14–26, 2014.
An informative paper on use of calcium aluminate cement for crowns.
Knibbs PJ, Walls AWG: A laboratory and clinical evaluation of three dental luting cements, J Oral Rehabil 16:467–473, 1989.
A number of studies such as this one have found poor correlation
between in vitro and in vivo disintegration of different luting agents.
The possible explanations are discussed.
Kovarik RE, Muncy MV: Fracture toughness of resin-modified glass ionomers, Am J Dent 8:145–148, 1995.
Lloyd CH, Adamson M: The fracture toughness (KIC) of amalgam, J Oral
Rehabil 12:59–68, 1985.
McKinney JE, Antonucci JM, Rupp NW: Wear and microhardness of a
silver-sintered glass ionomer cement, J Dent Res 67:831–835, 1988.
The investigation showed reduced wear with a cermet ionomer compared with an unfilled cement by test procedures designed to replicate
masticatory wear patterns. It also suggested that silver might have provided some lubricating effect.
McLean JW: Limitations of posterior composite resins and extending
their use with glass ionomer cements, Quintessence Int 18:517–529,
1987.
The advantages and disadvantages of composite resins versus glass
ionomer cements in posterior situations are reviewed.
Mennemeyer VA, Neuman P, Powers JM: Bonding of hybrid ionomers
and, resin cements to modified orthodontic band materials, Am J
Orthod Dentofac Orthop 115:143–147, 1999.
Air abrasion of band materials provides highly increased bond strength
of hybrid ionomer and resin cements to metal, except for the conventional glass ionomer.
Mitchell CA, Douglas WH, Cheng YS: Fracture toughness of conventional, resin-modified glass-ionomer and composite luting cements,
Dent Mater 15:7–13, 1999.
This study determined differences existed between the fracture toughness of the three types of luting cement, and the effect of mixing
method.
Mount GJ: An Atlas of Glass Ionomer Cements—A Clinician’s Guide, ed 3,
London, 2002, Martin Dunitz.
An excellent book for step-by-step presentation of the clinical usage of
the various GIC formulations.
Nicholson JW: Polyacid-modified composite resins (“compomers”) and
their use in clinical dentistry, Dent Mater 23:615–622, 2007.
Chemistry and properties of compomers designed for use in clinical
dentistry and reviews the literature in this area.
Pameijer CH, Nilner K: Long term clinical evaluation of three luting
materials, Swed Dent J 18:59–67, 1994.
Clinical evaluations up to 4 years show the three luting cements
performed satisfactorily. The choice of a final luting agent should
be based on anticipated postoperative pulpal reactions, rather than
exclusive reliance on physical properties.
Peters MC, Bresciani E, Barata TJ, et al: In vivo dentin remineralization
by calcium-phosphate cement, J Dent Res 89:286–291, 2010.
Clinical study reveals the capacity of a Ca-P base to promote remineralization of caries-affected dentin.
Phillips RW, Crim G, Swartz ML, et al: Resistance of calcium hydroxide
preparations to solubility in phosphoric acid, J Prosthet Dent 52:358–
360, 1984.
Newer “hard-setting” calcium hydroxide base material is less soluble
in acid than earlier versions.
Phillips RW, Swartz ML, Lund MS: In vivo disintegration of luting
agents, J Am Dent Assoc 114:489–492, 1987.
The in vivo solubility of a GIC was superior to either zinc phosphate
or carboxylic cement. Only silicophosphate cement approached the
GIC.
Powis DR, Folleras T, Merson SA, et al: Improved adhesion of a glass ionomer cement to dentin and enamel, J Dent Res 61:1416–1422, 1982.
152.e1

The first of many studies showing improvement in the bond strength
of a glass ionomer cement to tooth structure when the smear layer is
removed with polyacrylic acid.
Primus CM, Tay FR, Niu L-N: Bioactive tri/dicalcium silicate cements
for treatment of pulpal and periapical tissues, Acta Biomater 96:35–
54, 2019. doi:10.1016/j.actbio.2019.05.050.
A thorough review of the tricalcium silicate cements.
Sidhu SK, Watson TF: Resin-modified glass ionomer materials - A status
report for the American Journal of Dentistry, Am J Dent 8:59–67,
1995.
This report described the difference between conventional and early
version of hybrid ionomers.
Smith DC: Development of glass-ionomer cement systems, Biomaterials
19:467–478, 1998.
This article reviewed bonding of polyacrylic acid to backgrounds that
led to the development of glass ionomer cement.
Smith DC, Ruse ND: Acidity of glass ionomer cements during setting
and its relation to pulp sensitivity, J Am Dent Assoc 112:654–657,
1986.
The data showed that the glass ionomer luting cements showed lower
pH values for longer times than zinc phosphate and polycarboxylic
cements.
Swartz ML, Phillips RW, Clark HE: Long-term F release from glass ionomer cements, J Dent Res 63:158–160, 1984.
Fluoride release from luting and filling GIC, and silicate cement is
similar over a 12-month period. The silicophosphate cement released
somewhat lesser fluoride, while the release from a fluoride containing
polycarboxylate was negligible after the first few days.
ten Cate JW, Featherstone JD: Mechanistic aspect of the interactions
between fluoride and dental enamel, Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 2:283–
296, 1991.

152.e2

This article critically reviews the information about tooth-fluoride
interactions, both from laboratory and clinical studies.
Tyas MJ: Milestones in adhesion: Glass-ionomer cements, J Adhes Dent
5:259–266, 2003.
An excellent review of the conventional and hybrid glass ionomer
cements.
Weiner R: Liners and bases in general dentistry, Aust Dent J 56(Suppl
1):11–22, 2011.
This review article discusses the use of liners and bases and the types of
materials that are available to the restorative dentist.
Welbury RR, McCabe JF, Murray JJ, et al: Factors affecting the bond
strength of composite resin to etched glass ionomer cement, J Dent
16:188–193, 1988.
Omission of the etching process did not produce a significantly inferior bond, but the results were less dependable.
Wilson AD, McLean JW: Glass Ionomer Cements, Chicago, 1988, Quintessence Publishing Co.
This book provides an in-depth discussion of the evolution and chemistry of different GIC formulations.
Wolff MS, Barretto MT, Gale EN, et al: The effect of the powder-liquid ratio on in vivo solubility of zinc phosphate and polycarboxylate
cements, J Dent Res 64:316, 1985.
Low powder-liquid ration ratios undergo significantly more rapid disintegration than mixes made with recommended ratio.
Yamazaki T, Schricker SR, Brantley WA, et al: Viscoelastic behavior
and fracture toughness of six glass-ionomer cements, J Prosthet Dent
96:266–272, 2006.
Yap AU, Soh MS, Han TT, et al: Influence of curing lights and modes
on cross-link density of dental composites, Oper Dent 29:410–415,
2004.

8

Dental Amalgams
OUTLINE
Amalgam Alloy

Clinical Performance of Amalgam Restorations

Clinical Manipulation of Amalgam for Restorations

Safety of Amalgam Restorations

Properties of Amalgams

KEY TERMS
Amalgam An alloy containing mercury.
Amalgamation The process of mixing liquid mercury with one or
more metals or alloys to form an amalgam.
Condensation The process of pressing dental amalgam by force to
remove excess mercury and ensure continuity of the matrix phase.
Creep The time-dependent strain or deformation that is produced
by a stress. The creep process can cause an amalgam restoration to extend out of the restoration site, thereby increasing its
susceptibility to marginal breakdown.
Delayed expansion The gradual expansion of a zinc-containing
amalgam over a period of weeks to months. This expansion is
associated with the development of hydrogen gas, which is
caused by the incorporation of moisture in the plastic mass during its manipulation in a cavity preparation.

Dental amalgam An alloy that is formed by reacting mercury with
silver, copper, and tin, and that may also contain palladium, zinc,
and other elements to improve handling characteristics and
clinical performance.
Dental amalgam alloy (alloy for dental amalgam) An alloy of
silver, copper, tin, and other elements that is processed in the
form of powder particles or as a compressed pellet.
Marginal breakdown The gradual fracture of the perimeter or
margin of a dental amalgam filling, which leads to the formation
of gaps between the amalgam and the tooth.
Trituration The mixing of amalgam alloy particles with mercury in a device called a triturator; the term is also used to
describe the reduction of a solid to fine particles by grinding
or friction.

When metal particles are mixed with mercury in certain proportion at room temperature, the mixture appears plastic initially. At
that consistency, the mixture can be adapted to any shape with
light pressure. Meanwhile, the outer portion of the particle in the
mixture dissolves into mercury that slowly hardens the mixture.
When the solubility of the metal in mercury is exceeded, crystals
of mercury-containing compounds start to precipitate within the
mercury. The process increases the firmness of the mixture, which
enables sculpting of the mixture to the desirable anatomical form
with instruments. The reaction continues at a slower rate as the
mixture transforms into a solid with sufficient strength to resist
fracture. The reaction process is called amalgamation, and the
metallic solid containing mercury is called amalgam.

of spherical particles during the early 1960s. Despite amalgam’s
long history of success as a restorative material, there have been
periodic concerns regarding the potential adverse health effects
arising from exposure to mercury in dental amalgam. Because
of advances in resin-based composites and adhesive technology in
dentistry, the use of amalgam has declined substantially. Dental
amalgam use will be limited in the future and may eventually be
phased out of the clinician’s armamentarium.
As with other materials discussed in this book, practical skill
and sound scientific familiarity with the material are needed for
making high-quality restorations. Even when no new amalgams
are being placed in patients, there will still be billions of amalgam
restorations remaining in patients’ mouths. Many of these restorations will require attention, such as for replacement, repair, or
refurbishing procedures. In this chapter, amalgam structure, properties, and manipulation characteristics are discussed. However,
these concepts require an understanding of several key terms commonly used by the dental profession.
Before these alloys combine with mercury, they are known as
dental amalgam alloys. They are usually provided as (1) irregularly shaped particles (Figure 8-1, A) produced by milling or lathecutting a cast ingot of the amalgam alloy, (2) as spherical particles
(Figure 8-1, B) produced by atomizing the liquid alloy in a chamber filled with inert gas, or (3) as a mixture of both lathe-cut and

CRITICAL QUESTION
After reacting with liquid mercury, how do the original powder particles
become structural components of the set dental amalgams?

Amalgam Alloy
The amalgams used today are largely based on the formulation
published by G. V. Black in 1895. The major modifications to
that formulation were raising the copper content and the making

153

154

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

A

B

C

• Figure 8-1 Particle shapes of dental amalgam alloys. A, Conventional lathe-cut alloy (×100). B, Spherical alloy (×500). C, Typical admix high-copper alloy powder showing the lathe-cut silver-tin particles and
silver-copper spherical particles (×500).

A

B

C

• Figure 8-2 Types of amalgam trituration capsules. A, Reusable capsules with pestle. B, Preproportioned capsule with pestle. C, Preproportioned capsule without pestle.

spherical particles (Figure 8-1, C). The powder may also be compacted in the form of pellets, which are readily crushed to powder
during trituration, the process of mixing mercury and alloy.
Originally, the dentist had to dispense alloy powder and mercury
in a mortar and mix them together with a pestle by hand. Later, the
components were dispensed in a reusable capsule (Figure 8-2) with
a pestle and triturated by a power-driven mechanical device called
a triturator (Figure 8-3). Today, disposable amalgam capsules are
widely available. Each capsule contains a predetermined amount
of alloy powder and mercury in a sealed pouch, and the capsule is
sealed to prevent evaporation of the mercury.

Composition
Amalgam alloys are classified as either a low-copper (conventional)
or high-copper alloy (Table 8-1). In both types, the major components of the alloys are silver and tin.

The Silver-Tin System
Figure 8-4 is an equilibrium-phase diagram of the silver-tin alloy
system. Conventionally, starting from the left of the phase diagram, each phase is designated in Greek alphabetical order. The
ratio of silver to tin in Table 8-1 shows that amalgam alloys have a
narrow range of compositions, falling within the β + γ and the γ
phases of the diagram.

• Figure 8-3 A programmable triturator.
TABLE 8-1

Composition of Some Typical Commercial
Amalgam Alloys
COMPOSITION (MASS %)

Amalgam

Ag

Sn

Cu

Zn

Low copper (lathe-cut)

70.3

25.9

2.8

0.9

Low copper (spherical)

72.0

25.0

3.0

—

High copper (admix)

69.5

17.7

11.8

1.0

High copper (spherical)

61.0

26.0

13.0

—

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can zinc be a beneficial additive to alloy for dental amalgam but also a
component that can potentially cause significant postoperative discomfort to
the patient?

Low-Copper Alloys
Silver-tin alloys are quite brittle and difficult to blend uniformly unless a small amount of copper is substituted for silver.
The chief function of zinc in an amalgam alloy is to act as a

CHAPTER 8

1000

+ Liquid
800
Liquid

Temperature (°C)

+ Liquid

600

Atomized Powder
The molten amalgam alloy is atomized into fine spherical droplets of
metal in a chamber of inert gas. If the droplets solidify before hitting
a surface, the spherical shape is preserved, and these atomized powders are called spherical powders. Like the lathe-cut powders, spherical
powders are given an annealing heat treatment and surface washing.
Note in Table 8-1 that alloys for making spheres do not contain zinc
because there is no oxygen in the chamber to cause oxidation.

480°
(Ag3Sn)

400

232°

+ Liquid
+

221°

+

200

+

96.5%

26.8%
0
Ag

10

20

30 40 50 60 70
Composition (wt%, tin)

155

Lathe-Cut Powder
An as-cast ingot is first annealed to retain a uniform phase, and
then placed in a milling machine or in a lathe to be fragmented by
a cutting tool or bit. The powders obtained from cutting are acidwashed to produce a more reactive surface. Because the stresses
induced into the particle during cutting are not uniform and can
slowly be self-relieved over time, they can cause the performance
of the amalgam to be inconsistent.

960.5°

724°

Dental Amalgams

80

90

Sn

• Figure 8-4 Equilibrium-phase diagram of silver-tin system.

deoxidizer that reacts with oxygen during melting to minimize
the oxide formation of other constituents. Alloys without zinc
are more brittle, and their amalgams tend to be less plastic
during condensation and carving. The specification of the
American Dental Association (ADA) for amalgam alloys allows
some mercury in the alloy powder. The structure of these conventional alloys was dominated by Ag3Sn (γ phase), with some
Cu3Sn (ε phase).

High-Copper Alloys
The first high-copper alloy was formulated by mixing one part
of silver-copper eutectic spherical spheres particles with two parts
lathe-cut particles of Ag3Sn. This modification raises the copper
content to 11.8% by weight. This is often called dispersed-phase
alloy or admixed high-copper alloy. A second type of high-copper
alloy was made by melting all components of the dispersedphase alloy. This process yields a single composition system. The
presence of the higher copper content makes cutting the powder
into particles difficult. Thus they are often provided in a spherical form that is produced by an atomization process. The copper
content of this group of alloys could be as high as 30% by weight.
Various amounts of indium or palladium have been included in
some commercial systems.
Gallium-Based Alloys
Gallium, when alloyed with indium or tin, can be a liquid at room
temperature. It has been used to triturate with alloys for highcopper amalgam as a substitute for mercury.

Powder Configuration
Dental amalgams are made by mixing alloy powders with mercury. The reaction begins at the particle–mercury interface. Therefore the physical configuration and condition of the particles have
a significant influence on the setting process.

Particle Size
The average particle sizes of modern powders range between 15
and 35 μm. Smaller particles greatly increase the surface area per
unit volume of the powder. A powder containing tiny particles
requires a greater amount of mercury to form an acceptable amalgam. The particle-size distribution can affect the character of the
finished surface. When the amalgam has partially hardened, the
tooth anatomy is carved in the amalgam with a sharp instrument. During carving, the larger particles may be pulled out of
the matrix, producing a rough surface. Such a surface is probably
more susceptible to corrosion than a smooth surface. A smaller
average particle size tends to produce a more rapid hardening of
the amalgam, with greater early strength.
Lathe-Cut Powder Versus Spherical Powder
Amalgams made from lathe-cut powders or admixed powders
tend to resist condensation better than amalgams made entirely
from spherical powders. Because freshly triturated amalgams from
spherical powders are very plastic, one cannot rely on the pressure
of condensation to establish the proximal contour for a class II restoration. Spherical alloys require less mercury than typical lathecut alloys because spherical alloy powder has a smaller surface area
per volume than does the lathe-cut powder. Amalgams with low
mercury content generally have better mechanical properties.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Through what mechanism does the addition of 6 wt% or more of copper by
weight prevent the formation of the undesirable γ2 phase?

Amalgamation
As discussed earlier, modern dental amalgam alloys are based
on the intermetallic compound Ag3Sn; therefore the main reaction occurring after trituration with mercury will mainly be that
between Ag3Sn and mercury. Other elements in the alloy, especially copper, also play a significant role in the final microstructures of set amalgams.

Low-Copper Alloys
The main reaction products of low-copper alloy are the bodycentered cubic Ag2Hg3 (γ1) phase and the hexagonal Sn7-8Hg (γ2)
phase (Figure 8-5). Both phases are designated γ because they
happen to be the third phase of the respective Ag-Hg and Sn-Hg

156

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

Low-copper alloy
Ag3Sn + Hg

Symbols and stoichiometry of phases
Ag2Hg3 + Sn7-8Hg + unreacted Ag3Sn

High-copper admix alloy
Ag3Sn + Ag-Cu + Hg

Phase Symbols

Ag3Sn

γ

Ag2Hg3 + Sn7-8Hg + unreacted Ag-Cu + unreacted Ag3Sn

γ

Cu6Sn5 + Ag2Hg3 + unreacted Ag-Cu
Secondary
solid-state reaction
High-copper spherical alloy
[Ag3Sn + Cu3Sn] + Hg
Ag2Hg3 + Cu6Sn5 + unreacted [Ag3Sn + Cu3Sn]

Composition

1

Ag2Hg3

γ2

Sn7-8Hg

ε

Cu3Sn

η (η')

Cu6Sn5

• Figure 8-5 Reactions of low-copper and high-copper amalgams and symbols of phases involved in the
setting of dental amalgams.

Ag-Sn
Alloy

Ag
Alloy

Sn
Sn

Ag
Ag-Sn
Alloy

Alloy

Mercury

A

B

C

D

• Figure 8-6 Schematic drawings that illustrate the development sequence of the amalgam microstructure when lathe-cut, low-copper, alloy particles are mixed with mercury. A, Dissolution of silver and tin into
mercury. B, Precipitation of γ1 crystals in the mercury. C, Consumption of the remaining mercury by growth
of γ1 and γ2 grains. D, The final set amalgam. The dark patches are voids.

systems. Because the solubility of silver in mercury is much lower
than that of tin, the Ag2Hg3 phase precipitates first and is designated as γ1, whereas the Sn7-8Hg phase precipitates later and is designated as γ2. There is evidence from x-ray diffraction and thermal
analyses of set amalgam that a δ phase, which is richer in mercury
than γ2, is present in low-copper alloy instead of γ2. The existence
of γ2 or δ phases in low-copper amalgams remains an unresolved
question. For the purpose of this discussion, the Sn-Hg phase is
designated as γ2.
The low-copper alloy is usually mixed with mercury in about
a 1:1 ratio. This amount of mercury is insufficient to consume
the alloy particles completely; consequently, unreacted particles
are present in the set amalgam. Thus a typical low-copper amalgam is a composite in which the unreacted particles are distributed
within the γ1 and γ2 phases. The sequence of amalgamation of the
silver-tin alloy is shown schematically in Figure 8-6.

The physical properties of the set amalgam depend on the relative percentages of each microstructural phase. The greater the
number of unreacted Ag-Sn particles retained in the final structure, the stronger the amalgam will be. The γ2 phase is the weakest
and least stable in a corrosive environment and may suffer corrosion attack, especially in the crevices of the restorations. A reaction
between Cu3Sn (ε phase) and γ2 also occurs and yields Cu6Sn5
(η′ phase) to a lesser extent because of the low copper content.
Figure 8-7 illustrates the features found in a typical microstructure
of amalgam made from a lathe-cut, low-copper alloy.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Compared with amalgams made from admixed high-copper alloys, what are
the benefits and the risks of the amalgams made from high-copper, singlecomposition, spherical particles?

CHAPTER 8

157

Dental Amalgams

ε
γ

Ag-Cu

η'

γ1

• Figure 8-7 A scanning electron micrograph of a low-copper amalgam
(×1000). The micrograph features remaining β and γ phases (the large,
dark areas labeled P), ε phase (small, dark patches labeled E), γ1 phase
(light background labeled G1), γ2 phase (small grains labeled G2), and
voids (left-center and right-center areas labeled V).

High-Copper Alloys
As discussed earlier, high-copper alloy powders are available in a twophase admixed powder and a single-composition, single-phase powder, each with a unique amalgamation process (Figure 8-5).
Admixed Alloys

When mercury mixes with an admixed alloy powder, the silver in
the Ag-Cu spheres and the silver and tin from Ag-Sn particles dissolve into the mercury. Although both γ1 and γ2 crystals form, as
in lathe-cut alloys, the tin in mercury diffuses to the surfaces of the
Ag-Cu alloy particles and reacts with the copper to form a layer of
η'-phase crystals on the surface. The η' layer on the surface of Ag-Cu
alloy particles also contains γ1 crystals because the γ1 and η′ phases
form simultaneously. In this reaction, the γ2 phase forms along with
the η' phase, but the γ2 phase later reacts with copper from Ag-Cu
spheres, yielding additional η' phase (the secondary solid-state reaction in Figure 8-5). The γ2 phase can be eliminated with at least
12% of copper by weight in the alloy powder. Figure 8-8 illustrates
the microstructure of an admixed amalgam. As in the low-copper
amalgams, admixed amalgam is a composite of γ1 because of the
matrix phase with discrete unreacted alloy particles.
Single-Composition Alloys

The major components of single-composition particles are usually
silver, tin, and copper. The copper content of various single-composition alloys ranges from 13% to 30% by weight. Some alloys
contain a small quantity of indium or palladium. Several phases
are found in each single-composition alloy particle, including the
β phase (Ag-Sn), γ phase (Ag3Sn), and ε phase (Cu3Sn). Some
of the alloys may also contain the η' phase. The particles usually

• Figure 8-8 Scanning electron micrograph of an admixed high-copper
amalgam. The various phases and reaction layer are labeled. The ε phase
is part of the lathe-cut particle. The small, very light, drop-shaped areas
on the particle phase are high in mercury because of the freshly polished
specimen (×1000).

are spheres, but a formulation with all lathe-cut particles is also
available.
When triturated with mercury, silver and tin from the Ag-Sn
phases dissolve in mercury. Very little copper dissolves in mercury. The γ1 crystals grow, forming a matrix that binds together
the partially dissolved alloy particles. The η' crystals are found
as meshes of rod-like crystals at the surfaces of alloy particles
dispersed in the matrix. In most single-composition amalgams,
little or no γ2 forms (see Figure 8-5). Figure 8-9 shows the microstructure of a typical single-composition amalgam. This structure
includes unreacted alloy particles, γ1 grains, and η' crystals.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What steps can be taken by a dentist to extend the survival time of amalgam
restorations?

Clinical Manipulation of Amalgam for
Restorations
A good modern dental amalgam alloy can be manipulated so that the
restoration lasts, on average, 12 to 15 years. The cavity preparation
must be designed correctly, and the amalgam must be manipulated
properly so that no part of the amalgam restoration is placed under
excessive tensile stress. The manipulation variables discussed in this
section are the mercury/alloy ratio, trituration, and condensation.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What is the ideal mercury/alloy ratio for an admixed amalgam and a spherical
particle amalgam? What are the consequences of insufficient and excess
amounts of mercury for the amalgam restorations?

158

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

CRITICAL QUESTION
How should the optimal trituration time be determined for a given dental
amalgam product?

Mechanical Trituration
The objective of trituration is to ensure proper amalgamation of
the mercury and alloy and provide the optimal consistency for
condensation. The focus of trituration includes the triturator and
the consistency of the mixture.

• Figure 8-9 A scanning electron micrograph of a high-copper, singlecomposition amalgam (×560). The micrograph features unreacted alloy particles (labeled P), γ1 matrix phase (labeled G1), and η' crystals (labeled H).

Mercury/Alloy Ratio
The mercury/alloy ratio is the weight of mercury divided by the
weight of alloy needed for trituration. Sufficient mercury must
be present in the original mix to provide a coherent and plastic mass after trituration, but the amount must be low enough
that the mercury content of the restoration is at an acceptable
level without the need to remove an appreciable amount during condensation. The mercury content of the lathe-cut alloy
is about 50% by weight, and that for spherical alloys is 42% by
weight. When a mortar and pestle were used for mixing amalgam, an excess amount of mercury would be needed to achieve a
smooth and plastic amalgam. Removal of excess mercury would
be accomplished by squeezing or wringing the mixed amalgam
in a squeeze cloth prior to insertion of the increments into the
prepared cavity.
The most common dispenser is based on volumetric proportioning. Preweighed pellets or tablets are first placed in a capsule
(Figure 8-2). In mechanical mixing, the capsule serves as a mortar.
The mercury dispenser should be held vertically to ensure consistent dispensing of mercury. The dispenser should always be at least
half full when used to ensure that the proper weight of mercury
is dispensed.
Disposable capsules containing preproportioned mercury
and alloy are now widely used. Both components are physically
separated in the capsule. Some capsule designs require activation before trituration to bring the components together. Other
designs, called self-activating capsules, bring the alloy and mercury together automatically during the first few oscillations of
the amalgamator.
Regardless of the method used, the proper amount of
mercury and alloy must always be proportioned, or the
preproportioned capsule must be activated just before the start
of trituration.

Triturators
The main mixing mechanism of a triturator is a reciprocating
arm holding the capsule under a protective hood. The hood is to
confine mercury that might escape into the room and to prevent
a capsule from being accidentally ejected from the amalgamator
during trituration. Older models are usually a single-speed device
with an automatic timer to set the length of mixing. Later models
have multiple speed settings. A modern triturator is often microprocessor controlled (Figure 8-3) and contains preset trituration
programs for several materials. These newer models can also be
programmed by the operator to include other materials. The capsule serves as a mortar. A cylindrical metal or plastic piston of
smaller diameter than the capsule is inserted into the capsule, and
this serves as the pestle. Spherical alloys often do not need a pestle
(Figure 8-2).
Alloy manufacturers often provide a list of recommended time
schedules and speed settings in cycles per minute for their alloys
and various types of amalgamators. Because of the speed variations
in amalgamators, the schedule should serve only as a rough guide.
Dentists and assistants may want to adjust the time required to
attain a mix of the correct consistency. For a given alloy and mercury/alloy ratio, increased trituration time and/or speed shorten
the working and setting times.
A reusable capsule should be clean and free of previously
mixed, hardened alloy. At the end of each trituration procedure,
one should quickly remove the pestle from the capsule, replace the
lid, reinsert the capsule in the amalgamator, turn it on for a second
or two, and then remove the amalgam. This mulling process generally causes the mix to cohere so that the amalgam can be readily
removed from the capsule with minimal residue in the capsule.
Mulling minimizes the need for scraping out partially hardened
alloy, which usually produces scratches in the capsule.
Consistency of the Mix
The proper time of mixing can be determined by observing the
consistency of the mix. For example, the mix with a somewhat
grainy and dull appearance (Figure 8-10, A) indicates undertrituration. Not only will the amalgam restoration made from this
mix be weak, but also the rough surface left after carving of the
granular amalgam will increase the susceptibility to tarnish. If the
trituration has produced an amalgam of the general appearance
shown in Figure 8-10, B, the strength will be optimal, and the
smooth carved surface will retain surface luster longer after polishing. Because of the friction between particles during trituration,
such an amalgam mix should be warm (not hot) when the mix is
removed from the capsule. This will have no effect on the physical
properties of the amalgam other than to shorten the working time
somewhat. Overtrituration through a higher speed or a longer
mixing time results in a softer (mushy) mixture that often sticks
to the wall of the capsule. Compared with the properly mixed

CHAPTER 8

A

B

Dental Amalgams

159

C

• Figure 8-10 Appearance of freshly triturated amalgam mixture. A, A grainy, undertriturated mixture; a
restoration made of such a mixture has low strength and poor resistance to corrosion. The mixture may
appear as a solid mass, but the surface remains without luster, as shown. B, A properly triturated amalgam that appears rounded, with a smooth, shiny surface. C, An overtriturated amalgam mixture, which is
shinier than that of the properly triturated one, and because of more fluid consistency, the mass appears
flattened by the force of trituration.

amalgam, the surface of overtriturated amalgam is shinier, the
shape of the mass is flatter (Figure 8-10, C), and the working time
is shorter and has a slightly higher setting contraction.

CRITICAL QUESTION
During the condensation of an amalgam, at what point in time should the
triturated mixture be discarded and replaced by a new mixture?

Condensation
The goal of condensation is to compact the alloy into the prepared cavity so that the greatest possible density is attained,
with sufficient mercury present to ensure continuity of the
matrix phase between the remaining alloy particles. This results
from a reduction of excess mercury and porosity within the set
amalgam.
After the mix is made, the increments of alloy should be carried to, and inserted in, the prepared cavity by means of instruments such as small forceps or an amalgam carrier designed for
this purpose. Condensation of the amalgam should then be
promptly initiated. The field of operation must be kept absolutely
dry during condensation. Because of the nature of the operation,
condensation is usually accomplished within four walls and a
floor. One or more walls may be a thin sheet of stainless steel,
called a matrix band.

Condensation Procedure
Condensation is pressing a condenser point on the amalgam mass
under hand pressure. This procedure is usually started at the center, and then the condenser point is stepped incrementally toward
the cavity walls. The force requirements depend on the shape of
the alloy particle.
After condensation of an increment, the surface should appear
shiny. This indicates that there is sufficient mercury present at the
surface to diffuse into the next increment so that the subsequent
increment added will bond to the preceding one. Removing some
of the soft or mushy material before adding the next increment is
desirable. This step is less critical with modern-day amalgams that
require less mercury for mixing.
If the cavity is a large one or if for some reason undue
time is taken to complete condensation, another mix should

be made just before the original one is used up or when plasticity is lost. Condensation of partially set material fractures
and breaks up the matrix that has already formed. In addition, when the alloy has lost a certain amount of plasticity,
condensation without producing internal voids and layering
is difficult. The procedure of condensation is continued until
the cavity is overfilled.

Condensation Pressure
The condensation pressure is governed by the area of the condenser face and the force exerted by the operator on the mixture.
When a given force is applied, the smaller the condenser, the
greater is the pressure exerted on the amalgam. If the condenser
point is too large, the operator cannot generate sufficient pressure to condense the amalgam adequately and force the mix into
retentive areas. A study of 30 practitioners showed that the forces
applied are in the range of 13.3 to 17.8 N (3 to 4 lb). To ensure
maximum density and adaptation to the cavity walls, the condensation force should be as great as the alloy will allow, consistent with patient comfort. Many of the spherical alloys offer
only minimal resistance to the condensation force. Therefore the
strength properties of spherical amalgam alloys tend to be less
sensitive to condensation pressure.
In many instances, condensation becomes a matter of attaining good adaptation. The potential disadvantages of a spherical
alloy compared with an admixed alloy (lathe-cut and spherical
particles) are the tendency for overhangs in proximal areas and
weak proximal contacts. The shape of the condenser points should
conform to the area under condensation. For example, a round
condenser point is ineffective adjacent to a corner or angle of a
prepared cavity; a triangular or square point is indicated in such
an area. Points of various shapes are available to provide effective
condensation.

Carving and Finishing
After the amalgam has been condensed into the prepared cavity,
it is carved to reproduce the proper tooth anatomy. The objective
of carving is to simulate the anatomy rather than trying to reproduce extremely fine details. The carving should start only when
the amalgam is hard enough to resist the carving instrument. A
scraping or “ringing” sound should be heard when the amalgam

160

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

A

• Figure 8-11 Final finishing of an amalgam margin with a soft, unribbed
prophylaxis cup and fine prophylaxis paste. The cup should be used with
very light pressure to avoid flattening of anatomical contours.

is carved. Softer amalgam may be pulled away from the margins
by the carving instrument. The matrix band should be removed
during the final carving procedure. Make sure that excess amalgam has not been forced beyond the matrix gingivally during
condensation.
After carving, the surface of the restoration should be smoothed.
This may be accomplished by burnishing the occlusal surface with
a ball burnisher and the margins of the restoration with a rigid,
flat-bladed instrument. Final smoothing can be concluded by rubbing the surface with a moist cotton pellet or by lightly smoothing the surface with a rubber polishing cup and an extremely fine
polishing or prophylaxis paste (Figure 8-11). Clinical data on the
performance of restorations support the desirability of burnishing the fast-setting, high-copper systems. Burnishing slow-setting
alloys can damage the margins of the restoration.
Regardless of alloy, trituration method, or condensation technique, the carved surface of the restoration appears rough, as
demonstrated by the dull surface of the restorations shown in
Figure 8-12, A. The surfaces are covered with scratches, pits, and
irregularities, which can result in concentration cell corrosion over
time (Chapter 3, Concentration Cell Corrosion). The smooth surface on the restorations shown in Figure 8-12, B is produced by
the final finishing procedure. The final finish of the restoration
should be delayed for at least 24 hours after condensation and
preferably longer. Further discussion on polishing amalgams can
be found in Chapter 16, Dental Amalgams.

Properties of Amalgams
ADA Specification No. 1 (International Organization for Standardization [ISO] 24234) for amalgam alloys lists dimensional
change, compressive strength, and creep as the measures of amalgam quality. The controlling variables and significance of these
properties are described later.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the mercury content and condensation method affect the expansion
or contraction that may occur during the setting of an amalgam restoration?

B
• Figure 8-12 Effect of amalgam polishing. A, Amalgam restorations as
they appear after carving. B, The same restorations after final finishing.
(Courtesy Dr. Saulo Geraldeli.)

Dimensional Stability
Amalgam contracts or expands as the material sets. Severe contraction can lead to microleakage, plaque accumulation, and secondary caries. Excessive expansion can produce pressure on the pulp
and postoperative sensitivity. Protrusion of a restoration can also
result from excessive expansion. ADA Specification No. 1 states
that the dimensional change of amalgam should be in the range
of 15 to 20 μm/cm measured at 37 °C between 5 minutes and
24 hours after the beginning of trituration.

Mechanism of Dimensional Change
During Setting
When the alloy and mercury are mixed, contraction results as the
particles dissolve. Because the final volume of the γ1 phase is less
than the sum of the silver and liquid mercury volume needed to
produce the γ1 phase, contraction continues as the γ1 phase keeps
forming. In time, the γ1 crystals begin impinging against one
another, causing expansion when there is enough liquid mercury
making the matrix phase plastic. When the matrix phase becomes
rigid, further impingement of γ1 crystals cannot force the matrix
to expand further. The reaction continues with γ1 crystals growing
into interstices containing mercury.
This model implies that greater expansion will occur if sufficient
mercury is present in the mix when the dimensional change begins.
Therefore mixtures with less mercury in the mix, as for lower mercury/alloy ratios and higher condensation pressures, will exhibit
less expansion. In addition, accelerated setting and consumption of

CHAPTER 8

6

Dental Amalgams

161

16

4

A

14

0

Dimensional change ( m/cm)

Dimensional change (µm/cm)

2

–2

B

–4
–6
–8

Note change
in scale

–10
–12

C

–14
–16

12
10
8
6
4

–18
2

–20
1

2

3

4

5

6

24

Time (hours)

0

• Figure 8-13 Dimensional change of three amalgam products over a
24-hour period. A, A high-copper admixed amalgam with 50% mercury
(Dispersalloy). B, A high-copper, single-composition amalgam with 42.5%
mercury (Tytin). C, A lathe-cut, low-copper amalgam using a smaller size
of alloy particles (Fine-Cut).

mercury also exhibit reduced expansion, including longer trituration times and the use of smaller alloy particles.
Measurements of the dimensional change of many modern
amalgams reveal a net contraction (Figure 8-13), whereas in
the past, measurements invariably indicated that an expansion
occurred. The results conformed the model. Please note that
older amalgams contained larger alloy particles and were mixed
at higher mercury/alloy ratios than present-day amalgams. Likewise, hand trituration was used in preparing the specimens for
earlier studies. Now, high-speed mechanical amalgamators are
employed.

Effect of Moisture Contamination
When a zinc-containing, low-copper or high-copper amalgam is
contaminated by moisture during trituration or condensation,
a large expansion, such as that shown in Figure 8-14, can take
place. This expansion usually starts 3 to 5 days after placement
and may continue for months, reaching values as high as 4 μm/
mm (0.4%). This type of expansion is known as delayed expansion. This expansion is caused by the hydrogen produced by electrolytic action involving zinc and water. The hydrogen gas collects
within the restoration, increasing the internal pressure to levels
high enough to cause the amalgam to creep, thus producing the
observed expansion. Sources of contamination could include skin
secretions by touching amalgam with bare hands or saliva from
poor isolation of the operative field. Contaminants must be incorporated into the bulk of amalgam during trituration or condensation for delayed expansion to occur.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What is the phenomenon of marginal breakdown? What are the steps that
can be taken to reduce the risk or extent of this process?

0 6

12
(h)

18

24
Time

2 3 4 5 6 7 8
(d)

• Figure 8-14 Delayed expansion of a low-copper conventional amalgam.

TABLE 8-2

Compressive Strength, Creep, and
Tensile Strength of Low-Copper and
High-Copper Amalgams
COMPRESSIVE
STRENGTH (MPa)
1 Hour

7 Days

Tensile
Creep
Strength at
(%) 24 Hours (MPa)

145

343

2.0

60

Admix (high copper)

137

431

0.4

48

Single composition
(high copper)‡

262

510

0.13

64

*

Low copper

†

*

Fine Cut.

†

Dispersalloy.

‡

Tytin.

Strength
A prime requisite for amalgam restorations is adequate strength to
resist masticatory forces. In properly designed restorations, bulk
fracture failures of amalgam restorations are relatively rare. More
common are defects at the margins of amalgams. There is a difference of opinion on this subject as to whether the marginal defect
is caused by fracture of the enamel or of the amalgam seen as marginal breakdown. This aspect will be discussed later.
Traditionally, the strength of dental amalgam has been measured under compressive stress using specimens of dimensions
comparable to the volume of typical amalgam restorations. When
strength is measured in this manner, the compressive strength
of a satisfactory amalgam probably should be at least 310 MPa.
Table 8-2 shows typical compressive and tensile strengths at 1 hour

162

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

and 7 days after preparation for a low-copper amalgam and two
high-copper amalgams.
The strength of amalgam is more than adequate to withstand
potential compressive loads. However, the amalgam is much
weaker in tension than in compression (Table 8-2). Tensile stresses
can readily occur in amalgam restorations. For example, a compressive pressure on a cusp of a restored tooth introduces complex stresses that result in tensile stresses in the isthmus of the
restoration. It is important to reemphasize that amalgam cannot
withstand high tensile or bending stresses. The design of the restoration should include supporting structures whenever there is a
danger that the restoration will be flexed or pulled in tension. The
use of a high-copper amalgam will not help because the tensile
strengths of high-copper amalgams are not significantly different
from those of the low-copper amalgams.

Effect of Trituration
The trituration time and the speed of the amalgamator dictate
the effect of trituration. Either undertrituration or overtrituration
will decrease the strength for both conventional and high-copper
amalgams.
Effect of Mercury Content
Insufficient mercury between particles yields a dry, granular mix.
Such a mix results in a rough, pitted surface that promotes corrosion. Increasing the final mercury content increases the volume
fraction of the matrix phases. A higher mercury content promotes
the formation of the γ2 phase, even in a high-copper amalgam,
and a greater incidence and severity of fracture will occur as the
amalgam restorations age. The effect of the mercury content on
the compressive strength of amalgam is shown in Figure 8-15.
Effect of Condensation
Good condensation techniques express mercury and result in a
smaller volume fraction of matrix phases. Higher condensation
pressures are required for the lathe-cut amalgams. In the case
of the spherical amalgam, lighter pressures produce adequate
strength, whereas greater condenser pressures just simply punch
through the amalgam.

Effect of Porosity
Voids and porosity are factors that may reduce the compressive
strength of set amalgams. The lack of plasticity of amalgam mixes
caused by delayed condensation or undertrituration leads to
porosity in set amalgams. Insufficient condensation pressure on
lathe-cut alloys results in more porosity.
Effect of Amalgam Hardening Rate
Because a patient may be dismissed from the dental chair within
20 minutes after trituration of the amalgam, a vital question is
whether the amalgam has gained sufficient strength to prevent
fracture caused by a prematurely high occlusal force imposed
by the patient. When the patient is dismissed, the compressive
strength of the amalgam may be only 6% of the 1-week strength.
Thus a high percentage of fractures in amalgam restorations likely
occur within the first few hours after insertion.
ADA Specification No. 1 stipulates a minimum compressive
strength of 80 MPa at 1 hour. The 1-hour compressive strength of
high-copper, single-composition amalgams is exceptionally high
(Table 8-2). This strength will make fracture less probable if the
patient accidentally bites on the restoration soon after leaving the
dental office. In addition, these amalgams may be strong enough
shortly after placement to permit amalgam buildups to be prepared for crowns and allow earlier impressions of crown preparations to be made. Nonetheless, patients should be warned not to
subject the restoration to high biting forces for at least 8 hours
after placement. By that time, a typical amalgam will have reached
at least 70% of its strength.

Creep
Creep occurs when a solid material slowly deforms plastically
under the influence of constant stresses. Recall from the earlier discussion on delayed expansion that this is a form of creep
caused by the constant pressure from the formation of hydrogen
gas within moisture-contaminated zinc-containing amalgam. The
other example of creep is when the protruded segment of amalgam at the margin of the restoration fractures and leaves a ditch

Compressive strength (MPa)

450
400
350
300
250
Low Cu
High Cu admix
High Cu spherical

200
150
100
35

40

45
50
55
Hg concentration (wt%)

60

• Figure 8-15 Effect of mercury content (percent by weight) on the compressive strength of amalgam prepared with representative low-copper; high-copper admix; and high-copper, single-composition spherical
alloys.

CHAPTER 8

• Figure 8-16 Two surface amalgam restorations from (left) a low-copper amalgam with severe marginal breakdown and (right) minimal marginal discrepancy of a higher-quality amalgam restoration produced from
a high-copper admix alloy. Both amalgams were placed at the same
time. (Adapted from Quality Evaluation of Dental Restorations: Criteria for
Placement and Replacement, Chicago, 1989, Quintessence.)

Dental Amalgams

163

• Figure 8-17 Microstructure of 7-year-old conventional amalgam alloy
filling. The various phases are marked. Note extensive porosity, and that
the γ2 area has been replaced by a Sn-Cl corrosion product (CP). (Courtesy Dr. Gary W. Marshall, Jr. and Dr. Sally J. Marshall.)

around the margin. Figure 8-16 shows the difference in marginal
breakdown produced with high- and low-creep amalgams. The
creep of amalgam is determined by placing a cylinder of set amalgam (4 mm in diameter and 6 mm long) under a 36-MPa compressive stress. The specimen is prepared and stored at 37 °C for
7 days before testing. The change in length between 1 and 4 hours
as a percentage of the original length is the creep value reported
in Table 8-2.
When an amalgam creeps clinically, the γ1 phase is the one
that deforms plastically. Higher creep rates should be expected
for amalgam with higher γ1 volume fractions, and vice versa. The
presence of the γ2 phase increases the creep rate. In addition to the
absence of the γ2 phase, the very low creep rates in single-composition, high-copper amalgams may be associated with η′-phase rods,
which act as barriers to deformation of the γ1 phase. Therefore the
manipulative factors discussed previously that maximize strength
also minimize creep for any given type of amalgam.

be made to produce a smooth, homogeneous surface on a restoration in order to minimize tarnish and corrosion, regardless of the
alloy system used.
Whenever a gold restoration is placed in contact with an amalgam, corrosion of the amalgam can be expected as a result of the
large differences in electromotive force (EMF) of the two materials
(Chapter 3, Dissimilar Metals). The corrosion process can liberate
free mercury, which can contaminate and weaken the gold restoration. Biological effects such as galvanism can also result.
Concern has been expressed that if high-copper amalgam restorations were placed in the same mouth with existing restorations
of conventional amalgam, corrosion and failure could be accelerated with conventional amalgam. Clinical observations do not
indicate accelerated corrosion in such situations. Laboratory models designed to monitor corrosion in adjacent restorations suggest
that the current-flow paths are such that the electrochemical interaction between restorations is minimal.

CRITICAL QUESTION

Clinical Performance of Amalgam
Restorations

How can corrosion of an amalgam restoration lead to both positive and
negative outcomes?

Tarnish and Corrosion Resistance
Amalgam restorations often tarnish and corrode in the oral environment. A tendency toward tarnish, which is the result of silver sulfide forming on the surface, does not affect or change the
mechanical properties of the amalgam. Corrosion, on the other
hand, has a negative effect on the properties. The most common
corrosion products found with conventional amalgam alloys
are oxides and chlorides of tin. These are found at the tooth–
amalgam interface and within the bulk of amalgam restorations
(Figure 8-17).
There is indirect evidence that the γ2 phase is implicated in
both marginal failure and active corrosion in conventional alloys
but is not likely for the γ2-free high-copper alloys. The η' phase,
which is less susceptible to corrosion than the γ2 phase, exhibits
limited corrosion with high-copper amalgams. Every effort should

Amalgam does not adhere to the tooth structure. At best, amalgam affords only a reasonably close adaptation to the walls of the
prepared cavity. For this reason, cavity varnishes are used to reduce
the gross leakage that occurs around a new restoration. Dentin
bonding agents have been used in amalgam restorations to reduce
microleakage. However, there is no evidence either to claim or
refute a difference in survival between bonded and nonbonded
amalgam restorations. Nonetheless, bonded amalgam may allow
more conservative cavity preparations with reduced mechanical
retentive features.
If the amalgam is properly inserted, leakage decreases as the
restoration ages in the mouth. This is likely caused by corrosion
products that form at the interface between the tooth and the
restoration, sealing the interface, thereby preventing leakage. The
ability to seal against microleakage is shared by both the older,
low-copper amalgams and the newer, high-copper amalgams.
Detecting margins that may be open by a few micrometers, either

164

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

with the eye or with a dental instrument such as an explorer, is
virtually impossible.
The ultimate lifetime of an amalgam restoration is determined
by several factors: (1) the material, (2) the dentist and the assistant,
and (3) the patient’s environment. Changing dentists reduces the
lifetime of amalgam and composite restorations by up to 30%.
The first two parameters are the dominant factors controlling the
amalgam performance during the early life of the restoration. As
time proceeds, differences in the dynamics of the oral environment among patients contribute significantly to the variability in
the deterioration process, particularly marginal ditching. Changes
in the amalgam structure during clinical use and the survival of
amalgam restorations of various types are discussed next.

Clinical Significance of Dimensional Change
There are several causes of excessive expansion of amalgam. One
is insufficient trituration and condensation; the other is delayed
expansion brought about by the contamination of the Zn-containing amalgam with moisture during trituration or condensation. When an amalgam restoration expands and becomes wedged
tightly against the cavity walls, pressure develops in the pulp
chamber and causes pain. Such pain may be experienced 10 to
12 days after the amalgam is inserted. If the restoration is not
removed, a contaminated amalgam continues to expand, and the
result may be a protruding restoration.

CRITICAL QUESTION
A patient reports pain on chewing 1 day after an amalgam restoration has
been placed. What are the most likely causes of this condition, and what are
the best solutions?

A patient who complains of pain 1 day after an amalgam restoration is placed cannot be suffering the effects of delayed expansion caused by moisture contamination. One should examine the
surface of the restoration for shiny abrasion marks indicating the
possibility of hyperocclusion. The pain will disappear soon after
the occlusion is properly adjusted. Another possibility is the development of cracks in the tooth because of excessive tooth reduction
and weakened cusps. This situation may require replacement of
the amalgam and hooding of the weakened cusp or cusps, as is
done with a cast onlay restoration. There is also the possibility
that the cracks are minor and do not threaten the integrity of the
cusps or the vitality of the tooth. In this case, etching of the crack
walls and bonding of the fissure may provide a sufficient interim
solution. The last resort is to restore the tooth with an onlay or full
crown to minimize the risk of tooth fracture.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Which variables affect the marginal breakdown of amalgam restorations?
Which of these factors are under the control of the dentist?

Marginal Breakdown
Although the ditching of a margin (Figure 8-18) may not have
progressed to the point where secondary caries may have developed, the restoration is unsightly, and further deterioration may
be anticipated. Examination of clinical restorations has associated
secondary caries with marginal discrepancies that exceed 50 μm.
Many restorations are replaced as a preventive measure. Studies

• Figure 8-18 A “ditched” amalgam restoration with severe marginal
breakdown. (Courtesy Dr. Saulo Geraldeli.)

have shown that in a population with good oral hygiene, the incidence of secondary caries is quite low, even in the presence of
severe marginal deterioration. Thus a more conservative approach,
such as repair or refurbishing, has been suggested.
The creep rate has been found to correlate with the marginal
breakdown of conventional low-copper amalgams; that is, the
higher the amount of creep, the greater is the degree of marginal
deterioration. There appears to be little correlation between creep
and marginal breakdown with alloys having creep values below
1%. However, when creep values are above this level, restorations
made from higher-creep alloys generally demonstrate greater marginal breakdown than do restorations of lower-creep alloys.
The absence of the corrosion-susceptible γ2 phase in the microstructure of high-copper amalgams is assumed to be the principal factor responsible for the superior resistance of these alloys to
marginal breakdown. If this assumption is correct, the property of
creep is not an important property for the prediction of marginal
breakdown in high-copper amalgams. Expansion of the amalgam
from moisture contamination of a zinc-containing alloy can also
cause this type of failure.
Thus several mechanisms, separately or working synergistically,
may be responsible for marginal breakdown. At this time, the
exact mechanism of marginal breakdown and these specific properties are not completely understood. However, selecting alloys
that inherently have low creep and possess excellent resistance to
corrosion is advisable.

Improper Cavity Preparation or Finishing
If unsupported enamel is left at the marginal areas of the cavity
preparation, the tooth structure may fracture over time. Thus the
ditched amalgam may involve fracture of the adjacent enamel as
well as the amalgam.
Improper carving and finishing of the restoration and/or failure to remove a mercury-rich surface layer may leave a thin, weak
ledge of amalgam extending over the enamel that will eventually
fracture, leaving a ditched margin (Figure 8-19). Such thin extensions beyond the finish line of the tooth preparation are often difficult to detect and remove. One method is to finish the margins
lightly with a soft, unribbed prophylactic polishing cup and a fine,
slightly moist prophylaxis paste. However, the cup should be tilted
such that the edge rotates from amalgam to tooth (Figure 8-11).

CHAPTER 8

165

Dental Amalgams

Force
100

Margin
fracture

Survival rate (%)

80

60

40
HCZ
HC
LCZ
LC

20

• Figure 8-19 Marginal ditching of an amalgam restoration. If a feather
edge of the amalgam is left overlapping the enamel at the margin or if a
mercury-rich surface layer is not properly removed, the marginal extension
may fracture under masticatory stress.

0
0

2

4

6

8
Time (y)

10

12

14

• Figure 8-20 Survival curves for amalgam restorations classified accord-

Survival of Amalgam Restorations
Although many factors may contribute to the deterioration of
dental amalgams, as noted in the prior sections, the ultimate test
is the long-term survival of the well-placed dental amalgam restoration. The longevity of amalgam restorations depends on whether
they were placed in general practices or in controlled clinical studies. The median survival times for posterior amalgam restorations
were 7 to 15 years in general practices. Larger, more complex restorations fall within the lower end of this range. Based on controlled
clinical studies, dentists working under few time constraints for
placement of restorations in motivated patients projected median
survival times of 55 to 70 years.
Figure 8-20 is based on 14 independent controlled clinical
studies in which the survival of amalgam restorations was rated
in terms of their content of copper and zinc. Modern high-copper
amalgams with Zn have the best overall survival of nearly 90%
after 12 years. High-copper amalgams without Zn performed
the next best, with survival rates of approximately 80%. The survival curves for these two groups of amalgams could be distinguished only after approximately 6 years, when the better survival
of the high-copper systems containing a small quantity of Zn
became apparent. The next group was composed of conventional
low-copper amalgams with Zn. The worst performance was exhibited by low-copper amalgams that were Zn-free. These systems
exhibited failures in 50% of the restorations after only 10 years.
The reasons for the differences seen in this study are not completely clear. However, the combined and perhaps synergistic
effects of the additional Cu and Zn contents probably offered
increased corrosion protection to the restorations.

Repaired Amalgam Restorations
When part of an amalgam restoration fails, as from marginal fracture, this restoration can occasionally be repaired by condensing a
new mix of amalgam directly on the remaining part of the existing restoration. The important factor related to the quality of the
amalgam repair is the interfacial bond between the new and the
existing amalgam. Surface treatment of the existing amalgam is a
major factor in achieving a high-quality bond, as in tooth bonding (Chapter 6, Cleanness of the Bonding Surfaces). The surface
of an old amalgam to be bonded should be roughened to remove

ing to copper and zinc content. Both copper and zinc appear to provide
protection to restorations. Thus in these clinical trials, many more highcopper restorations containing zinc survived than low-copper restorations
without zinc. HC, high-copper amalgam without zinc; HCZ, high-copper
amalgam with zinc; LC, low-copper amalgam without zinc; and LCZ, lowcopper amalgam with zinc. (Adapted from Letzel H, et al: The influence of
amalgam alloy on the survival of amalgam restorations: A secondary analysis of multiple controlled clinical trials. J Dent Res 76:1787–1798, 1997.)

corrosion and saliva contaminants and free of loose debris. When
a freshly triturated amalgam is condensed directly onto the roughened surface of an existing amalgam, the flexural strength of the
repaired structure can reach 50% of that of unrepaired amalgam.
The repair should be attempted only if the area involved is one
that will not be subjected to high stresses or one in which the
two restoration parts are adequately supported and retained. Rubbing mercury on the repair site before condensing new amalgam
or increasing the mercury content in the new amalgam can further improve the repair strength. Both approaches use mercury
as a bonding agent but are discouraged because they increase the
patient’s exposure to mercury.
Making a slot on the existing amalgam to establish mechanical
interlocking between the two materials also improves the quality
of the repair joint if the slot can impede the crack growth. Some
resin-based bonding agents appear to be superior when mechanical roughening of the surface could not be performed. The reaction between the unreacted amalgam alloy in the old amalgam and
the mercury in the new amalgam is responsible for the bonding
that occurs with repaired restorations. The use of a dentin bonding agent facilitates mostly mechanical retention to the amalgam
surface but deprives the benefit of chemical bonding through mercury at the repaired interface.
Another repair option for areas that exhibit minor marginal
breakdown—gaps that are 250 μm or less in width—is to etch the
enamel adjacent to the restoration and, after rinsing and drying
the marginal gap area, seal the gap with a dentin bonding adhesive. There is evidence from a 10-year study that bonded and sealed
composite restorations placed directly over frank cavitated lesions
extending into dentin arrested the clinical progress of these lesions
for the duration of the study. Both sealed composite and conservative amalgam restorations exhibited superior clinical performance
and longevity compared with unsealed amalgam restorations. This

166

PA RT I I

Direct Restorative Materials

repair option is promising but needs more clinical evidence to
prove that this technique can prevent secondary caries.
The clinical diagnosis of secondary (recurrent) caries is the
main reason for replacing amalgam restorations; fracture is the second most common reason for the failure of amalgam restorations.
When secondary caries is diagnosed, replacement of the restoration often follows. An alternative treatment is to remove part of
the restoration to the full depth at the site of the defect along with
the infected tissue. Provided the main part of the restoration is
satisfactory, the part of the restoration that was removed can then
be filled with new amalgam or restored with resin-based composite. The repair of an existing restoration is now considered a viable
and cost-effective alternative to complete replacement, as stated in
numerous publications of clinical studies. However, there are no
published randomized controlled trials that are reported according
to the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT)
statement per a Cochrane review of 2014. Clinicians should base
their decisions on clinical experience and individual circumstances
in conjunction with patients’ preferences, where appropriate,
when deciding whether to repair or replace the restoration.

CRITICAL QUESTION
A patient is concerned about the safety of amalgam restorations after hearing
a news report on the toxicity of mercury. What quantifiable information can
you provide to assure him that the levels of mercury vapor released from
amalgam restorations are well below the known threshold levels for mercury
toxicity?

Safety of Amalgam Restorations
The amalgam restoration is possible only because of the unique
characteristics of mercury. Mercury is also the element that so
markedly influences the basic properties necessary to clinical services. The safety issue of using mercury in the oral environment
had been raised as early as when amalgams were introduced in
North America in 1833. Some aspects of the current controversy and the future of the amalgam are discussed in this section.
Additional information on the biocompatibility of mercury and
amalgam is given in Chapter 17, Dental Amalgam, on the biological effects of dental materials. To understand the possible
side effects of dental amalgam, the differences between allergy
and toxicity must be discussed.

Allergy
Typically, allergic responses represent an antigen–antibody reaction marked by itching, rashes, sneezing, and difficulty in breathing, with swelling or other symptoms. Contact dermatitis, which
is a clinical sign of Coombs’ type IV hypersensitivity reactions,
represents the most likely pathological side effect of dental amalgam. When such a reaction has been documented by an allergist,
an alternative material, such as a resin composite or ceramic material, must be used. However, none of these materials has yet been
proven to be safer, in all respects, than dental amalgam.

Toxicity
Toxicity is the dose-related potential of a material to cause cell or
tissue death. Some believe that mercury toxicity from dental restorations is the cause of certain undiagnosed illnesses, and that a real

hazard may exist for the dentist or dental assistant when mercury
vapors are inhaled during mixing, placement, and removal. Most
of the affected individuals documented in reports of mercury toxicity and allergic reactions attributable to dental amalgam were
dentists or assistants (nurses) in a dental clinic. Few such cases
have been reported during the past several decades, presumably
because of improvements in encapsulation technology, capsule
design, scrap storage methods, the elimination of carpets and other
mercury-retention sites around dental offices, and the decreased
use of amalgam. The matter has again come to the forefront with
recent concerns about mercury pollution of the environment.
The patient’s encounter with mercury vapor during insertion
of the restoration is brief, and the total amount of mercury vapor
released during occluding on amalgam restorations is far below
the “no effect” level. Undoubtedly, small amounts of mercury
are released during mastication. However, toxic reactions in the
patient from these traces of mercury penetrating the tooth or sensitization from mercury salts dissolving from the surface of the
amalgam are extremely rare.

Mercury Hygiene in Dental Offices
The potential hazards of mercury in dental offices can be greatly
reduced by attention to a few precautionary measures. The operatory should be well ventilated. All excess mercury—including waste,
disposable capsules, and amalgam removed during condensation—
should be collected and stored in well-sealed containers. Debris
of amalgam from cutting and grinding can be trapped by installing amalgam particle separators in the dental wastewater stream.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) required most
dental offices nationwide to install amalgam particle separators by
July 14, 2020. Proper disposal through reputable dental vendors is
mandatory to prevent environment pollution. Amalgam scrap and
materials contaminated with mercury or amalgam should not be
incinerated or subjected to heat sterilization. If mercury is spilled,
this must be cleaned up as soon as possible. Ordinary vacuum
cleaners merely disperse the mercury further through the exhaust
system. Mercury-suppressant powders are helpful but should be
considered as temporary measures. If mercury encounters the skin,
the skin should be washed with soap and water.
As noted earlier, the capsules, both reusable and single-use, that
use a mechanical amalgamator should have a tightly fitting cap to
avoid mercury leakage. When amalgam is being ground, a water
spray and suction should be used. Eye protection, a disposable mask,
and gloves are now standard requirements for dental practices.
The use of an ultrasonic amalgam condenser is not recommended. A spray of small mercury droplets has been observed surrounding the condenser tip during condensation. More detailed
recommendations can be obtained by consulting the most recent
reports of the ADA’s Council on Scientific Affairs.
An important part of a program for handling toxic materials is
periodic monitoring of actual exposure levels. Current recommendations suggest that this procedure be conducted annually. Several techniques are available. Instruments can be used that yield
a time-weighted average for mercury exposure to air samples in
the operatory. Film badges are also available that can be worn by
office personnel in a manner like radiation exposure badges. Biological determinations can be performed on office staff to measure
mercury levels in blood or urine. The risk from mercury exposure
to dental personnel cannot be ignored, but close adherence to recommended hygiene procedures will help ensure a safe working
environment.

CHAPTER 8

Regulation of Amalgam Use by Governments
Currently, several countries are phasing out the use of dental amalgam because of environmental concerns. An important aspect of
all these actions is the conclusion that, from a medical point of
view, there is no clinical evidence to suggest that amalgam is causing illness in the general population.
Denmark published draft orders in 1989 proposing to discontinue the sale of all mercury-containing products, including dental amalgam, by 1999. In 1992, the Swedish parliament approved
a general plan to phase out mercury from all sources, including
amalgam in children’s temporary teeth. The Swedish national
health system stopped reimbursing patients for amalgam restorations in 1999. This decision greatly reduced the use of amalgam
before a blanket ban on mercury took effect on June 1, 2009. In
2008, Norway announced a general ban on the use of mercury in
products, which includes dental amalgam, with a 3-year phaseout period. Sweden and Denmark announced similar bans in the
same year.
In 1996, Health Canada recommended that the use of amalgam should be avoided in the primary teeth of children, pregnant
women, and patients with renal impairment. In addition, clinicians should use safe handling practices with mercury and provide information to patients on the benefits and risks of amalgam
treatment. Austria, Germany, and Japan have similar restrictions
on the use of dental amalgams. In Japan, the demand for mercury
to be used in amalgam decreased from 5200 kg in 1970 to 100 kg
in 2006. The annual emission of mercury into the air from amalgam in 2005 was estimated at about 3 kg. In 2009, the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a final rule (FDA2008-N-0163) classifying dental amalgam as a class II device. The
FDA classification of all medical devices is discussed in detail in
the risk classes of Chapter 17, Legal Regulations and Risk Classes.

Selected Readings
Anglen J, Gruninger SE, Chou NH, et al: Occupational mercury exposure in association with prevalence of multiple sclerosis and tremor
among US dentists, J Am Dent Assoc, 146:659–668, 2015.
Occupational Hg exposure in U.S. dentists decreased over time and
now is approaching that of the general population.
Agnihotry A, Fedorowicz Z, Nasser M: Adhesively bonded versus nonbonded amalgam restorations for dental caries, Cochrane Database Syst
Rev, (Issue 3), 2016.
This review only found one underreported trial. They concluded that
there was no evidence to either claim or refute a difference in survival
between bonded and non-bonded amalgam restorations.
Bengtsson UG, Hylander LD: Increased mercury emissions from modern
dental amalgams, Biometals, 30:277–283, 2017.
High-copper amalgams have been developed with focus on mechanical strength and corrosion resistance, but have been sub-optimized in
other aspects, resulting in increased instability and higher emission of
mercury vapor.
Fédération Dentaire Internationale: Technical Report 33: Safety of dental
amalgam, Int Dent J, 39:217, 1989.
This authoritative organization reviewed the literature on mercury
toxicity and concluded that there is no documented scientific evidence to show adverse effects from mercury in amalgam restorations
except in rare cases of mercury hypersensitivity.
Letzel H, van't Hoff MA, Marshall GW, et al: The influence of amalgam
alloy on the survival of amalgam restorations: A secondary analysis of
multiple controlled clinical trials, J Dent Res, 76:1787–1798, 1997.

Dental Amalgams

167

Although the policy of dental amalgam use is being revised
in several countries, a global discussion on limiting the use of
mercury products led by the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) has adopted the conclusions from the Minamata
Convention on Mercury that opened for signature at the Diplomatic Conference in Kumamoto, Japan, on October 10, 2013.
There are 127 parties to the treaty as of January 2021. The treaty
is a multilateral environmental agreement that addresses specific
human activities that are contributing to widespread mercury pollution. The provision of the treaty related to dental amalgam is
that the measures each party takes to phase down the use of dental
amalgam shall allow for the party’s domestic circumstances and
relevant international guidance and shall include two or more of
the measures listed in the document. They include setting national
objectives of reducing caries and minimizing the use of amalgam,
discouraging the use of amalgam through education and insurance policies, restricting use to encapsulated forms of amalgam
if needed, promoting the use and research of cost-effective and
clinically effective mercury-free alternatives, and promoting the
use of best environmental practices in dental facilities to reduce
releases of mercury and mercury compounds to water and land.
Essentially, the convention calls for a phase-down approach to
dental amalgam through greater emphasis on prevention, research
into new dental materials, and best management practice. Current
information on the Minamata Convention on Mercury can be
found at http://www.mercuryconvention.org.

Acknowledgments
The author wishes to acknowledge Dr. G. W. Marshall, Jr., and
Dr. S. J. Marshall for their previous contribution to the amalgam
section of this chapter.

An analysis of multiple clinical trials demonstrated the synergistic
effects of copper and zinc content on the survival of amalgam restorations.
Mahler DB, Van Eysden J: Dynamic creep of dental amalgam, J Dent Res,
48:501–508, 1969.
The first suggestion that creep may be a major factor in marginal
breakdown of amalgam restorations. Although modern alloys have
low creep values, the test is a useful screening tool in selecting commercial alloys.
Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Curtis JW Jr, Ergle JW, et al: Ultraconservative and
cariostatic sealed restorations: Results at year 10, J Am Dent Assoc,
130:1751–1757, 1999.
Mjör IA, Gordan VV: Failure, repair, refurbishing and longevity of restorations, Oper Dent, 27:528−534, 2002.
This article advocates removing part of the restoration to the full
depth to make a firm diagnosis regarding the extent of the lesion and
the affected area that can be repaired or refurbished.
Sharif MO, Merry A, et al: Replacement versus repair of defective restorations in adults: amalgam, Cochrane Database Syst Rev, (Issue 2), 2014.
There are no published randomized controlled trials relevant to this
review question. Repair of amalgam restorations is often more conservative of the tooth structure than replacement.
Swartz ML, Phillips RW: In vitro studies on the marginal leakage of
restorative materials, J Am Dent Assoc, 62:141–151, 1961.
One of numerous studies demonstrating the reduction in microleakage
as the amalgam restoration ages that is unique to restorative materials.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Agnihotry A, Fedorowicz Z, Nasser M: Adhesively bonded versus nonbonded amalgam restorations for dental caries, Cochrane Database Syst
Rev, (Issue 3), 2016.
This review only found one underreported trial. They concluded that
there was no evidence to either claim or refute a difference in survival
between bonded and non-bonded amalgam restorations.
Anglen J, Gruninger SE, Chou NH, et al: Occupational mercury exposure in association with prevalence of multiple sclerosis and tremor
among US dentists, J Am Dent Assoc, 146:659–668e1, 2015.
Occupational Hg exposure in US dentists decreased over time and
now is approaching that of the general population.
Anusavice KJ: Quality Evaluation of Dental Restorations: Criteria for Placement and Replacement, Chicago: Quintessence, 1989.
Six chapters of the book written by various experts deal with clinical
studies, methods of evaluation, and differences in diagnosis related to
dental amalgam restorations. Evidence supporting a more conservative approach to replacement of the “ditched” amalgam restoration
is presented.
Barbakow F, Gaberthuel T, Lutz F, et al: Maintenance of amalgam restorations, Quintessence Int, 19:861–870, 1988.
A systematic procedure for recontouring, finishing, and polishing
existing amalgam restorations is illustrated, along with proper selection of instruments.
Bauer JG: A study of procedures for burnishing amalgam restorations,
J Prosthet Dent, 57:669–673, 1987.
This report describes the combined factors of time from end of trituration, burnishing force, and number of burnishing strokes on margins,
surface characteristics, and porosity for a high-copper admixed amalgam. Early times and minimal strokes gave the best results.
Bengtsson UG, Hylander LD: Increased mercury emissions from modern
dental amalgams, Biometals, 30:277–283, 2017.
High-copper amalgams have been developed with focus on mechanical strength and corrosion resistance, but have been sub-optimized in
other aspects, resulting in increased instability and higher emission of
mercury vapor.
Bogacki RE, Hunt RJ, del Aguila M, et al: Survival analysis of posterior
restorations using an insurance claims database, Oper Dent, 27:488–
492, 2002.
This study found that composite restorations did not last as long as
amalgam restorations based on insurance claim data collected between
1993 and 2000. The study also found changing dentists reduced the
longevity of restorations by 30%.
Brian HC, Lam LO, Jagannathan N, et al: A systematic review of amalgam bonded restorations: In vitro and clinical findings, J Contemp
Dent Pract, 19:1013–1024, 2018.
Bonded amalgam restorations reduce the need for mechanical retention and adverse effects of microleakage, there is lack of consistent
evidence across all outcome domains to advocate the benefit of bonding of all amalgam restorations.
Brownawell AM, Berent S, Brent RL, et al: The potential adverse health
effects of dental amalgam, Toxicol Rev, 24:1–10, 2005.
According to these authors, there is no convincing evidence pointing
to any adverse health effects attributable to dental amalgam restorations besides hypersensitivity in some individuals.
Browning WD, Johnson WW, Gregory PN: Clinical performance
of bonded amalgam restorations at 42 months, J Am Dent Assoc,
131:607–611, 2000.
There were no differences in the clinical performance of amalgams
with bonding agent or copal varnish.
Dodes JE: The amalgam controversy. An evidence-based analysis, J Am
Dent Assoc, 132:348–356, 2001.
Authoritative studies consistently have found that amalgam restorations are safe and effective. This review of the literature further supports this conclusion.
Duke ES, Cochran MA, Moore BK, et al: Laboratory profiles of 30 highcopper amalgam alloys, J Am Dent Assoc, 105:636–640, 1982.

The laboratory profiles identify the alloy systems and reflect the performance of the alloy. A classification for various types is presented.
Eames WB: Preparation and condensation of amalgam with a low mercury/alloy ratio, J Am Dent Assoc, 58:78–83, 1959.
This technique revolutionized the procedure in constructing an amalgam restoration by use of minimal amounts of mercury in the original
mix.
Fairhurst CW, Ryge G: X-ray diffraction investigation of the Sn-Hg phase
in dental amalgam editor. In Mueller WM, editor: Advances in X-Ray
Analysis, Vol. 5, New York, 1962, Plenum Press.
These investigators determined the of the Sn-Hg phase in dental amalgam to have hexagonal unit cell.
Fédération Dentaire Internationale: Technical Report 33: Safety of dental
amalgam, Int Dent J, 39:217, 1989.
This authoritative organization reviewed the literature on mercury
toxicity and concluded that there is no documented scientific evidence to show adverse effects from mercury in amalgam restorations
except in rare cases of mercury hypersensitivity.
Ferracane JL, Mafiana P, Cooper C, et al: Time-dependent dissolution of amalgams into saline solution, J Dent Res, 66:1331–1335,
1987.
This study indicates that the rate of dissolution of ions from amalgams
into saline is low once the amalgam has set, probably inhibited by
formation of a surface film.
Gale EN, Osborne JW, Winchell PG: Fracture at the margins of amalgam
as predicted by creep, zinc content, and gamma-2 content, J Dent Res,
61:678–680, 1982.
The data suggest that equations based upon in vitro data to predict
marginal breakdown for alloys might not be predictive for non-γ2
alloys.
Innes DBK, Youdelis WV: Dispersion strengthened amalgams, Can Dent
Assoc J, 29:587–593, 1963.
This research introduced the admix alloys.
Klausner LH, Green TG, Charbeneau GT: Placement and replacement
of amalgam restorations. A challenge for the profession, Oper Dent,
12:105–112, 1987.
A national survey assessed factors underlying the placement and
replacement of amalgam restorations. The reactions to questions such
as expected length of service and reasons for failure are interesting, and
a challenge to the profession is identified.
Letzel H, van’t Hoff MA, Marshall GW, et al: The influence of amalgam
alloy on the survival of amalgam restorations: A secondary analysis of multiple controlled clinical trials, J Dent Res, 76:1787–1798,
1997.
An analysis of multiple clinical trials demonstrated the synergistic
effects of copper and zinc content on the survival of amalgam restorations.
Letzel H, van’t Hof MA, Vrijhoef MMA, et al: A controlled clinical study
of amalgam restorations: Survival, failures, and causes of failure, Dent
Mater, 5:115–121, 1989.
Bulk fracture or fracture at the marginal ridge was reported as the
leading mode of failure. It is suggested that further improvements in
mechanical properties and corrosion resistance are needed.
Letzel H, Vrijhoef MMA: The influence of polishing on the marginal
integrity of amalgam restorations, J Oral Rehabil, 11:89–94, 1984.
The effect of polishing on the marginal integrity of amalgam restorations continues to be a matter of some controversy, particularly with
high-copper alloys. This study questions the necessity for polishing, at
least in respect to marginal defects.
Lloyd CH, Adamson M: The fracture toughness of amalgam, J Oral
Rehab, 12:59–68, 1985.
Admixed high-copper products have higher fracture toughness than
those of a single-component powder, attributed to differences in
microstructures.
Mahler DB, Adey JD: Microprobe analysis of three high-copper amalgams, J Dent Res, 63:921–925, 1984.
The composition and structure of three high-copper amalgams before
and after their reaction were studied.
168.e1

Mahler DB, Adey JD, Marek M: Creep and corrosion of amalgam, J Dent
Res, 61:33–35, 1982.
Corrosion was directly related to the amount of γ2 phase present,
while creep was either high or low, depending on the absence or presence of γ2.
Mahler DB, Adey JD, Van Eysden J: Quantitative microprobe analysis of
amalgam, J Dent Res, 54:218–226, 1975.
The presence of tin in the Ag-Hg phase [γ1] was confirmed, and Cu3Sn
was found in the original alloy particles. In the dispersant amalgam,
little Sn-Hg phase [γ2] was found and the reaction phase Cu6Sn5 was
identified.
Mahler DB, Pham BV, Adey JD: Corrosion sealing of amalgam restorations in vitro, Oper Dent, 34:312–320, 2009.
This in vitro study shows that gap sealing was influenced by the size
of the initial gap as well as corrosion resistance of the amalgam, and
zinc in the amalgam alloy resulted in the formation of zinc corrosion
products in the gap. The latter might explain the reported reduction
in marginal fracture of zinc-containing amalgams.
Mahler DB, Terkla LG, Van Eysden J, et al: Marginal fracture versus
mechanical properties of amalgam, J Dent Res, 49:1452–1457, 1970.
Two independent studies showed clinical superiority for the admixed
alloy developed by Innes and Youdelis. These publications are classic,
as they opened the vista of the high-copper alloy.
Mahler DB, Van Eysden J: Dynamic creep of dental amalgam, J Dent Res,
48:501–508, 1969.
The first suggestion that creep may be a major factor in marginal breakdown of amalgam restorations. Although modern alloys have low creep
values, the test is a useful screening tool in selecting commercial alloys.
Marshall GW Jr, Marshall SJ, Letzel H, et al: Microstructures of Curich amalgam restorations with moderate clinical deterioration, Dent
Mater, 3:135–143, 1987.
The large variations in porosity and corrosion products in clinically
retrieved restorations are described. It also demonstrates a zinc-rich
layer and other tin layers that form at the tooth-amalgam interface.
May KN, Wilder AD, Leinfelder KF: Burnished amalgam restorations:
A two-year clinical evaluation, J Prosthet Dent, 49:193–197, 1983.
Clinical behavior of amalgam restorations found that precarved burnishing improved the marginal integrity of lathe-cut alloys. Coupled
with postcarved burnishing, it was suggested as a viable substitute for
conventional polishing.
Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Curtis JW Jr, Ergle JW, et al: Ultraconservative and
cariostatic sealed restorations: Results at year 10, J Am Dent Assoc,
130:1751–1757, 1999.
Mitchell RJ, Koike M, Okabe T: Posterior amalgam restorations usage,
regulation, and longevity, Dent Clin North Am, 51:573–589, 2007.
Long-term studies have shown that under optimal conditions, posterior restorations of amalgam and resin composite last longer than
reported previously, and that amalgam restorations outlast composite
restorations. In general practice settings, posterior amalgam and composite restorations both have lower longevities.
Mitchell RJ, Okabe T: Setting reactions in dental amalgam. Part 1. Phases
and microstructures between one hour and one week, Crit Rev Biol
Med, 7:12−22, 1996.
Two recent reviews of setting reactions are offered, covering microstructures of various amalgam types and their properties as related to
clinical performance.
Mjör IA: The safe and effective use of dental amalgam, Int Dent J,
37:147–151, 1987.
Many pertinent matters related to the amalgam restoration are discussed in this review, including mercury toxicity, longevity of the restoration, common causes for failure, and certain properties that relate
to performance.
Mjör IA, Gordan VV: Failure, repair, refurbishing and longevity of restorations, Oper Dent, 27:528−534, 2002.
This article advocates removing part of the restoration to the full
depth to make a firm diagnosis regarding the extent of the lesion and
the affected area that can be repaired or refurbished.

168.e2

Okabe T, Mitchell RJ, Butts MB, et al: A study of high-copper amalgams.
III. SEM observations of amalgamation of high-copper powders,
J Dent Res, 57:975–982, 1978.
Third of a series of three publications defining the phases that occur
in the setting reaction of the alloy and mercury and as influenced by
parameters, such as composition and particle configuration.
Opdam NJ, Bronkhorst EM, Loomans BA, et al: 12-year survival of
composite vs. amalgam restorations, J Dent Res, 89:1063–1067,
2010.
This retrospective study shows that large composite restorations had
a higher survival in the combined population and in the low-risk
group, and three-surface amalgams exhibited better survival in highrisk patients.
Rogers KD: Status of scrap (recyclable) dental amalgams as environmental health hazards or toxic substances, J Am Dent Assoc, 119:159–166,
1989.
A review presenting available evidence to show amalgam scrap is not
a toxic substance or environmental health hazard; it also covers portions of the literature that indicate intraoral amalgams do not present
an adverse health hazard.
Sharif MO, Merry A, et al: Replacement versus repair of defective restorations in adults: amalgam, Cochrane Database Syst Rev, (Issue 2),
2014.
There are no published randomized controlled trials relevant to this
review question. Repair of amalgam restorations is often more conservative of the tooth structure than replacement.
Shen C, Speigel J, Mjör IA: Repair strength of dental amalgams, Oper
Dent, 31:122–126, 2006.
This study shows the need of condensing directly on the old amalgam
to establish the bond between new and old amalgams.
Staninec M, Eakle WS, Silverstein S, et al: Bonded amalgam sealants:
two-year clinical results, J Am Dent Assoc, 129:323–329, 1998.
This study shows there is no difference in two-year retention between
bonded amalgams as pit and fissure sealants without mechanical preparation and resin-based pit and fissure sealants.
Soderholm KJ: An x-ray diffractometric investigation of the Sn-Hg binary
system within the 0-40% Hg interval, J Dent Res, 66:712–715, 1987.
This study shows the presence of in the range of Sn-Hg used in dental
amalgam.
Soncini JA, Maserejian NN, Trachtenberg F, et al: The longevity of amalgam versus compomer/composite restorations in posterior primary
and permanent teeth: findings From the New England Children’s
Amalgam Trial, J Am Dent Assoc, 138:763–772, 2007.
Compomer/composite restorations on posterior tooth surfaces in
children may require replacement or repair at higher rates than amalgam restorations, even within five years of placement.
Sutow EJ, Jones DW, Hall GC: Correlation of dental amalgam crevice
corrosion with clinical ratings, J Dent Res, 68:82–88, 1989.
Marginal breakdown and the corrosion behavior of γ2 and γ2-free
amalgams were studied in vitro. The methodology is of interest.
Swartz ML, Phillips RW: In vitro studies on the marginal leakage of
restorative materials, J Am Dent Assoc, 62:141–151, 1961.
One of numerous studies demonstrating the reduction in microleakage as the amalgam restoration ages that is unique to restorative
materials.
Vrihjoef MMA, Vermeersch AG, Spanauf AJ: Dental Amalgam, Chicago,
1980, Quintessence.
A comprehensive treatment of the various factors involved in the
design of amalgam alloys, their properties, and the parameters that
influence clinical behavior. The lifetime of an amalgam is determined
by the material, the dentist and assistant, and the patient.
Walker RS, Wade AG, Iazzetti G, et al: Galvanic interaction between gold
and amalgam: Effect of zinc, time and surface treatments, J Am Dent
Assoc, 134:1463–1467, 2003.
Galvanic interaction between cast gold and amalgam is reduced over
time and surface treatments but is increased considerably when the
amalgam contains zinc.

Part III

Indirect Restorative Materials
9 Metals, 171
10 Ceramic-Based Materials, 202
11 Prosthetic Polymers and Resins, 233
12 Dental Implants, 253

169

9

Metals
OUTLINE
Desirable Properties of Dental Alloys

Alternative Technologies for Fabricating Prostheses

Functional Mechanical Properties of Alloys

Joining of Dental Alloys

Classification of Dental Casting Alloys

Wrought Alloys and Plastic Deformation of Metals

Alloys for All-Metal Prostheses

Effects of Annealing Wrought Alloys

Alloys for Metal-Ceramic Prostheses

Types of Wrought Alloys

Alloys for Removable Partial Dentures

KEY TERMS
Age hardening Process of hardening certain alloys by controlled heating and cooling, which usually is associated with a phase change.
Annealing The process of controlled heating and cooling that is
designed to produce desired properties in a metal. Typically, the
annealing process is intended to soften metals, increase their
ductility, stabilize shape, and increase machinability.
Antiflux A substance such as graphite that prevents the flow of
molten solder on areas coated by the substance.
Base metal A metal that readily oxidizes or corrodes. Important
base metals for dental alloys are nickel, cobalt, iron, titanium,
and chromium.
Cold welding The metal-joining process by metallic bonding that
does not rely on heating to achieve fusion but the pressure
applied to the interface between parts to be joined; no liquid
phase is produced within the interface joint.
CP Ti Commercially pure titanium, which consists of 99 wt% or
higher-purity titanium, with oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and
hydrogen dissolved interstitially.
Dislocation An imperfection in the crystalline arrangement of atoms consisting of an extra partial plane of atoms (edge dislocation), a spiral distortion of normally parallel atom planes (screw
dislocation), or a combination of the two types.
Flux Compound applied to metal surfaces that dissolves or prevents
the formation of oxides and other undesirable substances that
may reduce the quality or strength of a soldered or brazed area.
Grain growth The increase in the mean crystal size of a polycrystalline metal produced by a heat-treatment process.
Grain refinement The process of reducing the crystal (grain) size
in a solid metal through the action of specific alloying elements
or compounds; the process increases the yield strength of metals.
Lost wax technique Process in which a wax pattern, prepared in
the shape of missing tooth structure, is embedded in a casting
investment and burned out to produce a mold cavity into which
molten metal is cast.
Noble metal Gold and platinum group metals (platinum, palladium, rhodium, ruthenium, iridium, and osmium), which

are highly resistant to oxidation and dissolution in inorganic
acids.
Precipitation hardening The process of strengthening and
hardening a metal by precipitating a phase or constituent from
a saturated solid solution.
Recovery A stage of heat treatment that results in the partial
restoration of properties of a work-hardened metal without a
change in the grain structure.
Recrystallization The process of forming new stress-free crystals
in a work-hardened metal through a controlled heat-treatment
process.
Soldering Process of building up a localized area of a metal prosthesis with a molten filler metal or joining two or more metal components by heating them to a temperature below their solidus temperature and filling the gap between them using a molten metal
with a lower liquidus temperature. If the melting temperature of
the solder is greater than 450 °C, the process is called brazing.
Springback The amount of elastic strain that a metal can recover
when loaded to and unloaded from its yield strength; an important property of orthodontic wires.
Strain hardening The increase in strength and hardness and
decrease in ductility of a metal that is caused by permanent
deformation below its recrystallization temperature; also called
work hardening or cold working.
Superelasticity The ability of certain nickel-titanium alloys to
undergo extensive elastic deformation resulting from a stressassisted phase transformation, with the reverse transformation
occurring on unloading; sometimes called pseudoelasticity.
Welding Process of fusing two or more metal parts through the
application of heat, pressure, or both, with and without a filler
metal, to produce a localized union across an interface between
the workpieces.
Working range The maximum amount of elastic strain that an
orthodontic wire can sustain before it permanently deforms.
Wrought alloy A metal that has been permanently deformed to
alter the shape of the structure and certain mechanical properties, such as strength, hardness, and ductility.

171

172

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

In his 1907 U.S. Patent 865823, Taggart described a method of
making gold inlays using the lost wax technique. The lost wax
method of making metal objects involves pouring a molten metal
into a mold that has been created with a wax pattern (Chapter 14,
Wax Pattern and Sprue Design). The process led to making custom
precision casts for the restoration of missing tooth structure, such
as onlays, crowns, multiple-unit fixed dental prostheses (FDPs),
and frameworks for removable partial dentures (RPDs). Since the
early 1980s, the numbers of dental alloys, along with new alloy
systems, have increased dramatically as a result of the market-price
increase of noble metals, the performance of the same function
at a lower cost, the need for increasingly specialized physical and
mechanical properties, and the awareness of the importance of
biological properties.
Objects of any design, intricate or simple, can be produced by
using the lost wax technique as long as a wax pattern can be made
and invested, and alloys can be melted, or by using alternative
processing techniques such as computer-aided design/computeraided manufacturing (CAD-CAM) milling and three-dimensional
(3-D) printing. On the other hand, many ancillary dental materials and instruments are fabricated from initially cast alloys that
have been subsequently rolled to form sheets or rods, drawn into
wire or tubing, or forged into a finished shape. Rolling, drawing,
and forging are major processes of permanently deforming metals.
Whenever a cast pure metal or alloy is permanently deformed to
an intended shape in any manner, it is considered a wrought alloy.
This permanent deformation alters the microstructure, and the alloy
exhibits properties that are different from those it had in the as-cast
state. The most significant change is the increase of yield strength
with a reduction in ductility. The applications of wrought alloys in
dentistry include orthodontic wires, clasps for RPDs, root canal files
and reamers, preformed crowns in pediatric dentistry, and surgical
instruments. Most metal-based restorations and prostheses are cast
and not wrought.
In the construction of dental appliances, there is often a need to
join metal parts, cast or wrought, together using high heat. When
wrought alloys are involved in such joining, the strength and fracture resistance of the wrought alloy will be compromised if the
metal is exposed to the temperature range at which the wrought
structure is diminished or lost. Such weakening can occur during
the metal-joining process for stainless-steel orthodontic appliances.
The ability to work with dental alloys and associated wrought
alloys is dependent on a knowledge of these materials. The goal
of this chapter is for the reader to become familiar with various types of casting alloys and associated wrought alloys. We
will discuss the desirable properties and the relevant mechanical
properties of dental alloys first. For casting alloys, the focus is
the alloy classification and clinical applications of the alloys. For
wrought alloys, the focus is the process of permanent deformation and its effect on the properties for their specific applications
in dentistry. Several types of wrought alloys used in dentistry are
described. The description of joining metals is like that for bonding presented in Chapter 6; the emphasis is on the principles and
procedures of the process.
As previously done in Chapter 2, Metals, the terms metal and
alloy are frequently used interchangeably.

Desirable Properties of Dental Alloys
Depending on the primary purpose of the prosthesis, the choice
of casting alloy is made by the dentist in collaboration with a
qualified dental laboratory technician or technologist. From the

standpoint of patient safety and the risk of medico-legal issues, it
is highly important to understand the following clinically important requirements and properties of dental casting alloys:
1. Biocompatibility—The alloy must tolerate oral fluids and not
release any harmful products into the oral environment that
might cause a toxic or allergic reaction. Biocompatibility will
be covered in Chapter 17.
2. Tarnish and Corrosion Resistance—Corrosion is the physical deterioration of a material in the oral environment, and
tarnish is a thin film that is adherent to the metal surface
(Chapter 3, Tarnish and Corrosion). Both phenomena affect
the durability and appearance of the prostheses.
3. Thermal Properties—The melting range of the casting alloys
must be low enough to form smooth surfaces with the mold
wall of the casting investment (Chapter 14, Investment Materials). For metal-ceramic prostheses, the alloys must have closely
matching thermal expansion coefficients to be compatible with
the given porcelains, and they must tolerate high processing
temperatures without deforming via a creep process.
4. Strength Requirements—The alloy must have sufficient strength
for the intended application. For example, alloys for bridgework
require higher strength than alloys for single crowns.
5. Fabrication—The molten alloy should flow freely into the
investment mold, without any appreciable interaction with the
investment material, and wet the mold to form a surface free of
porosity. It should be possible to cut, grind, finish, and polish
the alloy to obtain a prosthesis with a satisfactory surface finish.
6. Porcelain Bonding—The alloy must be able to form a thin
adherent oxide that enables chemical bonding to ceramic
veneering materials.
7. Economic Considerations—The cost of metals used for single-unit prostheses or as frameworks for FDPs or RPDs is a
function of the metal density, fluctuations in metal prices,
and the cost per unit mass.

Functional Mechanical Properties of Alloys
Mechanical properties are the measured responses of materials in
the form of stress and strain under an applied force or distribution of forces. The relevant functional characteristics of casting
and wrought alloys are described next.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are two clinical disadvantages of cast metals that have lower elastic
moduli? Why does a long-span bridge require alloys of high elastic modulus?

Elastic Modulus
One characteristic of a material with a high elastic modulus is its
rigidity or stiffness. For a dental prosthesis, rigidity is equivalent to
the resistance to flexure (bending). When a long-span FDP flexes
during occluding of the pontic, the mesiodistal bending moment
exerted on the abutment teeth can act as a dislodging force, lifting the mesial and distal aspects of the prosthesis. Furthermore,
a flexing bridge can induce lateral forces on the abutment teeth,
resulting in the loosening of these teeth. For a metal-ceramic
prosthesis, the overlying brittle porcelain will fail catastrophically
when the metal substructure flexes beyond the flexural limit of
the ceramic. The elastic modulus is also important for the major
connectors of an RPD, which must have enough rigidity to prevent flexure during the placement and function of the prosthesis.

CHAPTER 9

Resistance to flexure also allows the clasps of an RPD to fit into
areas of minimal undercuts and still provide adequate retention.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is it that a cast prosthesis that is subjected to tensile stress above the
alloy yield strength will not necessarily fracture?

Yield Strength (Proof Stress)
Recall the discussion in Chapter 4, Stress-Strain Properties that
yield strength, elastic limit, and proportional limit, by definition,
are different properties, but all three terms have been used to reflect
the capacity of a cast prosthesis to withstand mechanical stresses
without permanent deformation. Ideally, dental alloys should have
a high yield strength so that a large amount of stress must be applied
before a permanent change in dimensions occurs. For an orthodontic appliance, it relates to the maximum force the wire can deliver.
Generally, alloys with tensile yield strengths above 300 MPa function satisfactorily in the mouth.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the alloy ductility increase the fracture resistance of a margin of a
cast metal crown or a clasp arm on an RPD?

Ductility (Percent Elongation)
Ductility represents the amount of permanent deformation under
tensile stress that an alloy can undergo before it fractures. If the
force applied is in a compressive mode, the property is called
malleability. A reasonable amount of ductility and malleability is
essential if a prosthesis requires adjustment to be functional, such
as the bending of RPD clasps and the burnishing of crown margins. As discussed earlier, one needs to apply stress greater than
the yield strength of the material to cause permanent deformation
on a metal surface. Therefore, high ductility allows one to achieve
more permanent deformation without fracture but does not indicate if burnishing or adjusting the prosthesis would be easier or
more difficult in terms of the stress required.

CRITICAL QUESTION

Metals

173

the prosthesis. Eventually, a crack propagates to a critical size,
and sudden fracture occurs. Common engineering expressions of
fatigue fracture resistance are fatigue strength and endurance limit
(Figure 4.15). Fatigue strength (SNf) is defined as the stress at which
failure occurs after a specific number of fatigue cycles. Endurance
limit is the maximum stress that can be maintained without failure
over an infinite number of cycles. Some alloys do not have a welldefined endurance limit.

Classification of Dental Casting Alloys
In 1932, the dental materials group at the National Bureau of Standards (now National Institute of Standards and Technology) classified dental gold alloys being used then by Vickers hardness number
(VHN): type I (soft, VHN 50 to 90), type II (medium, VHN 90
to 120), type III (hard, VHN 120 to 150), and type IV (extra hard,
VHN 150 and above). Since then, the number of alloy compositions
and applications has increased vastly. They are now classified according to composition, intended usage, or mechanical properties.

Alloy Classification by Noble Metal Content
In 1984, the American Dental Association (ADA) proposed a simple
classification for dental casting alloys based on the content of noble
metals. Three categories were described: high noble (HN), noble
(N), and predominantly base metal (PB). Subsequently, a fourth
group of titanium and titanium alloys was added because of the
unique characteristics of titanium. This classification is presented in
Table 9-1. Noble metals comprise a group of seven metals that are
resistant to corrosion and tarnish in the mouth. In order of increasing melting temperature, they include gold, palladium, platinum,
rhodium, ruthenium, iridium, and osmium. These noble metals and
silver are sometimes called precious metals, referring to their high economic value, but the term precious is not synonymous with noble.
Silver is reactive in the oral cavity and is not a noble metal.
Based on this classification, the IdentAlloy program was
established by manufacturers to provide documentation of certified alloys. Under this program, each alloy has a certificate
(Figure 9-1) that lists its manufacturer, alloy name, composition,
and ADA classification. Some insurance companies use it as well
to determine the cost of crown and bridge treatment. Keep in
mind that this system certifies only the composition of alloys.

Why is a harder metal more resistant to wear than a softer metal?

Hardness
Clinically, hardness reflects the resistance of the restoration to
scratching and abrasion by the opposing tooth or restoration
and the ability to maintain the smoothness of the prosthesis in
the oral environment. However, a harder restoration surface can
cause excessive wear of softer opposing dentition or restorations.
In addition, harder surfaces are more difficult to cut, grind, finish,
and polish because higher stress is required for each procedure.

Fatigue Resistance
Fatigue failure can occur when a material is subjected to repeated
loading and unloading below its elastic limit. Most fractures of
prostheses and restorations develop progressively over many stress
cycles of loading and unloading. When the load is above a certain threshold, crack propagation is initiated from flaws within

TABLE 9-1

Alloy Classification by Noble-Metal
Content—American Dental Association
(2003)

Alloy Type

Total Noble-Metal Content

High noble (HN)

Must contain ≥40% Au and ≥60% by weight
of noble-metal elements*

Noble (N)

Must contain ≥25% by weight of noble-metal
elements

Predominantly base
metal (PB)

Contains <25% by weight of noble-metal
elements

Titanium and titanium
alloys

Titanium ≥85% by weight

*

Noble-metal elements include Au, Pd, Pt, Rh, Ru, Ir, and Os.

174

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

• Figure 9-1 Examples of IdentAlloy certificate.

Alloy Classification by Mechanical Properties
The historic ADA Specification No. 5, which originally had composition ranges for the component elements in the four types of gold
casting alloys, evolved to stipulating mechanical property requirements for yield strength, percentage elongation, and Vickers hardness. The relevant current standard is International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) 22674:2016, which classifies metallic
materials for fixed and removable restorations and appliances into
six types according to yield strength and elongation, regardless of
noble metal contents (Table 9-2).

TABLE 9-2

Type

Classification of Metallic Materials for
Dental Applications—ISO 22674 (2016)

Yield Strength Elongation
(MPa)
(%)
Examples of Applications

0*

—

—

Single-tooth fixed
restorations—for example,
small veneered one-surface
inlays, veneered crowns

1

80

18

Single-tooth fixed restorations,
veneered or nonveneered
one-surface inlays, veneered
crowns

Alloys may be classified based on the principal or most abundant element (e.g., a palladium-based alloy), or they may be
named based on the two or three most important elements (e.g.,
Pd-Ag, Co-Cr, or Ni-Cr-Be alloys). The components are listed
in decreasing order of weight percent. An exception to this rule
is the identification of elements that substantially affect the
properties of the alloy. For example, Ni-Cr-Mo-Be alloys are
often designated as Ni-Cr-Be alloys because of the contributions
of beryllium to the control of castability and surface oxidation
at high temperatures and the relative health-hazard potential
of beryllium compared with other metals. Castability refers to
the ease of making quality castings. Excellent websites to view
the wide range of dental alloy compositions include Argen at
https://argen.com/.

2

180

10

Single-tooth fixed restorations—
for example, crowns or inlays
without restriction on the
number of surfaces

3

270

5

Multiple-unit fixed restorations—
for example, bridges

4

360

2

Appliances with thin cross
sections that are subjected
to very high forces—for
example, RPDs, clasps, thin
veneered crowns, widespan bridges or bridges with
small cross sections, bars,
attachments, implant-retained
superstructures

Alloy Classification by Dental Applications

5

500

2

Thin RPDs, parts with tin cross
sections, clasps

Alloy Classification by Principal Elements

There are three categories of dental casting alloys designated by
application: all-metal fixed prostheses, metal-ceramic prostheses,
and RPDs. Each type of alloy classified by noble metal content
(Table 9-1) is available in all three categories. One may use highnoble and noble alloys intended for metal-ceramic prostheses to
fabricate all-metal prostheses. However, alloys for all-metal restorations, which can deform or melt during porcelain-firing, should
not be used to make metal-ceramic restorations.
Base-metal and titanium alloys, on the other hand, are often
marketed for both all-metal and metal-ceramic prostheses because
of their oxide formation at room temperature. In this chapter,
dental alloys are discussed by their applications.

ISO, International Organization for Standardization; RPD, removable partial
denture.
*

Metallic materials for metal-ceramic crowns produced by electroforming or sintering belong
to type 0.

Alloys for All-Metal Prostheses
These alloys are discussed in three main categories: noble (includes
high-noble), predominantly base-metal, and titanium and titanium alloys.

CHAPTER 9

175

gold-based RPD is now rare). The alloys for bridge and RPD
framework constructions must be sufficiently rigid to resist
flexure, possess high yield strength to prevent permanent distortion, and be ductile enough for adjustment if the clasp of a
framework has been distorted or needs adjustment.
Various elements have been incorporated into gold alloys to
produce alloys with suitable properties. For example, platinum
and palladium increase the hardness and elastic modulus of gold
and raise the melting temperature of the alloy. A higher melting
temperature is beneficial when components are to be joined by
soldering. Copper in a sufficient quantity relative to the gold content renders the alloy heat-treatable (Chapter 2, Gold-Copper System) but can alter the color of the alloy. Silver forms solid solutions
with gold and palladium and is effective in neutralizing the reddish color of copper in gold-copper alloys. Palladium has a good
range of solubility with gold, silver, and copper, resulting in good
mechanical properties and improvement of tarnish and corrosion

High-Noble and Noble Alloys
The compositions of selected high-noble and noble alloys are
given in Table 9-3. Their physical and mechanical properties
are shown in Table 9-4. Gold and palladium are the two major
elements that make up the nobility of noble and high-noble alloys;
these alloys are discussed in two categories: Au-based alloys and
Pd-based alloys.

Gold-Based Alloys
Referring to Table 9-2, type 1 alloys are designed for inlays
that are not subjected to substantial mastication forces. Type 2
alloys having greater mechanical properties than type 1 are used
for one-surface inlays. Type 3 alloys are used for constructing
crowns, bridge abutments, and inlays, which are subjected to
great stress during mastication. Type 4 alloys are used in highstress areas such as bridges and RPD frameworks (although the

TABLE 9-3

Metals

Typical Compositions of High-Noble and Noble Alloys for All-Metal Prostheses
ELEMENTAL COMPOSITION (PERCENT BY WEIGHT)

Alloy Type

Color

Au

Pd

Ag

Cu

Pt

In

Balance*

1

Yellow

83

0.5

10

6

—

—

Zn; Ir

2

Yellow
Yellow

82
77

—
1

—
13

—
8.5

18
—

—
—

Ir
Zn; Ir

3

Yellow
Yellow
Yellow
White

74.5
50
2
—

3.5
4
34.9
25

11
35
30
71.5

10.5
10
—
—

—
—
—
—

—
—
30
2.5

Zn; Ir
Zn; Ir
Zn:3; Ir
Zn; Ru

4

Yellow
Yellow
Pale yellow
White

60
50
20
4

4
3
20
30.3

20.5
26
36
45.7

15
11.5
—
18.5

—
—
—
—

—
3
18
—

Zn; Ir
Zn:1; Ir
Zn:6; Ir
Zn:1.5; Ir

*

Elements without a value are less than 1% by weight.

TABLE 9-4

Physical and Mechanical Properties of Some Modern High-Noble and Noble Alloys for All-Metal
Prostheses
Density (g/cm3)

Yield Strength
(MPa; soft/hard)

Hardness
(VHN; soft/hard)

Elastic Modulus
(GPa)

Elongation
(%; soft/hard)

High noble

16.6

126

85

70

51

2

High noble
High noble

19.2
15.4

146
221

95
120

50
109

23
54

3

High noble
Noble
Noble
Noble

15.5
13.2
10.5
10.5

207/276
309/648
297
248/310

121/182
138/225
180
145/155

76
104
51
55

39/19
28/15
5–6
10/8

4

High noble
Noble
Noble
Noble

14.5
13.2
11.3
10.6

350/607
428/683
420/530
460/700

165/235
180/255
165/220
195/265

88
86
103
116

35/4
28/16
10/2
10/3

Alloy Type

ADA Classification

1

ADA, American Dental Association; VHN, Vickers hardness number.

176

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

resistance. Zinc acts as an oxygen scavenger during the melting
and casting of noble and high-noble alloys.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What effects can the cooling rate of a heat-treated type 3 gold-copper alloy
have on its hardness and ductility?
What happens within gold-copper alloys that are subjected to a prescribed
heating–cooling cycle?

The underlying principles for heat treatment of these alloys have
been discussed in Chapter 2, Gold-Copper System. Briefly, the
casting is placed in a furnace at 700 °C for 10 minutes, and then
quenched in water to retain a disordered solid-solution phase with
reduced yield strength and hardness but increased ductility. The
process is called a solution heat treatment. The same casting is placed
in a furnace with the temperature set between 200 and 450 °C for
15 to 30 minutes before quenching in water. The treatment produces
regions of ordered solid-solution phase with increased yield strength
and hardness but a reduction of elongation (Table 9-4). The process
is called age hardening.
The softening heat treatment is indicated for prostheses that are
ground or reshaped (permanent deformation) to a different form,
either in or out of the mouth, to restore their ductility. Because the
proportional limit is increased during age hardening, a considerable increase in the modulus of resilience can be expected. The
hardening heat treatment is indicated for metallic RPDs, saddles,
FDPs, and other similar structures where rigidity of the prosthesis
is needed. For small structures, such as inlays, a hardening treatment is not usually required.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What characteristics of palladium make it a natural choice of element to
replace gold for dental alloys?

Silver-Palladium Alloys
Silver-palladium alloys are often white and predominantly silver in composition and must contain at least 25% palladium to
provide tarnish and corrosion resistance of the alloy. They may
also contain copper and a small amount of gold to increase the
ductility and improve the castability of the alloy for dental applications. Ag-Pd alloys can produce acceptable castings when close
attention is paid to precise control of the casting and mold temperatures. Casting temperatures are in the range of those for yellow gold alloys. The copper-free Ag-Pd alloys may have physical
properties similar to those of a type 3 gold alloy. With 15% or
more copper, the alloy may have properties more like those of a
type 4 gold alloy.
Indium and palladium at a 1:1 atomic ratio form a gold-color
intermetallic compound. When the content of indium in a Pd-Ag
alloy is 18% to 30% by weight, the alloy achieves a gold-like color.
The colored phase of the Pd-In binary alloy system is hard and
brittle and is not a strengthener. Iridium or ruthenium is added
in small quantities to high-noble and noble alloy compositions
for grain refinement because smaller grains improve the yield
strength (Chapter 2, Grain Refinement and Grain Size).

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the role of chromium in predominantly base-metal alloys? How does
beryllium improve the properties of nickel-based alloys?

Predominantly Base-Metal Alloys
Currently, there are two main groups of base-metal dental alloys:
nickel-chromium (Ni-Cr) and cobalt-chromium (Co-Cr). The
Ni-Cr alloys can be further divided into those with and without
beryllium, which improves castability and promotes the formation of a stable metal oxide for porcelain bonding. The majority of
Ni-Cr alloys are used for small castings such as crowns and FDPs,
and Co-Cr alloys are primarily used for casting RPDs for which a
high elastic modulus and yield strength are needed. Table 9-5 lists
the compositions and properties of selected base-metal alloys for
all-metal and metal-ceramic applications.
Chromium, a critical element of base-metal alloys, oxidizes
rapidly on the surface of the alloy to form a thin layer of chromium oxide, which prevents the diffusion of oxygen into the
underlying metal and the corrosion process. Chromium in the
bulk alloy also provides strengthening by solid-solution hardening. Molybdenum increases corrosion resistance and strength and
decreases the thermal expansion coefficient of base-metal alloys.
Higher thermal expansion is beneficial for porcelain bonding and
minimizes the risk of porcelain cracking or fracture. Some minor
elements are incorporated to improve manipulation and mechanical properties. For example, beryllium lowers the fusion temperature of the alloys, which improves castability, and refines grain
size, which increases strength. Manganese and silicon also improve
the castability of the alloys. Carbon forms carbides with other elements in the alloy, increasing the hardness and yield strength with
a reduction in ductility. The aluminum in Ni-Cr alloys forms a
nickel-aluminum compound, Ni3Al, which increases both the
yield strength and the tensile strength. Nitrogen, which is incorporated in the alloy during casting in ambient air, also improves
the overall qualities of the casting.
The manipulation and mechanical properties of base-metal
alloys are described in more detail in the following section on
alloys for metal-ceramic prostheses and in the subsequent section
on RPDs because base metals are used to a lesser extent for allmetal prostheses.

Titanium and Titanium Alloys
Titanium has a high melting point (1668 °C) and a high rate
of oxidation above 900 °C. It requires a special casting machine
with high-temperature melting capability in a nonoxidizing
chamber. For example, an argon arc with a nonconsumable
tungsten electrode or high-frequency induction is used for melting titanium alloys in crucibles made of copper, magnesia, or
carbon and in an argon or helium atmosphere. A casting investment consisting of oxides, such as MgO, ZrO2, or Y2O3, which
are more stable than titanium oxide, is used to ensure acceptable
castability. Centrifugal force, casting-pressure difference, and gas
pressure have been used to force the molten-metal flow into the
mold. Titanium can react with the investment material during
casting and forms a very hard surface layer called α-case, with a
thickness up to 150 μm. The VHN of cast commercially pure
titanium increases from a bulk value of nearly 200 to approximately 650 at a depth of 25 μm below the surface. Special instruments are required in the dental laboratory for finishing and
adjusting titanium castings.
Titanium derives its corrosion protection from a thin passivating oxide film (about 10 nm thick), which forms spontaneously
with the surrounding oxygen. Titanium is considered the most
biocompatible metal used for dental restorations and prostheses.

CHAPTER 9

TABLE 9-5

177

Metals

Typical Compositions and Mechanical Properties of Base-Metal Alloys for Crown, FDP, and Metal-Ceramic
Applications
COMPOSITION (PERCENT WT)

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES
Yield Strength
(MPa)

Hardness
(VHN)

Elastic
Modulus (GPa)

Elongation
(%)

Fe:1.9; Si:1.7; Ce

340

230

200

13

8

Ga:8; Al; Fe; Si; Mn;
Zr; Cu

300

177

191

27

23

10

Si:2; Fe:15.5; Ce:0.5

310

220

224

29

x†

14

4.5

Al:2.5; Be:1.6; Ti

784

350

200

9

77

—

14

4.7

Mn; Fe; Si; C

630

370

207

10

Norex (Pentron
Alloys/Argen)

—

55

25

—

W:10; Ru:5; Al, Nb,
Y, Zr

621

350

204

7

Heraenium P
(Heraeus Kulzer)

—

59

25

4

W:10; Si:1; Mn:0.8; N

650

330

200

8

Jelbond Supreme
(Jelenko Alloys/
Argen)

—

61

27

6

W:5; Mn; Si; Fe; C

475

365

223

8

Alloy (Supplier)

Ni

Co

Cr

Mo

Balance*

IPS d.Sign 15
(Ivoclar)

58.7

1

25

12.1

Rexalloy (Pentron
Alloys/Argen)

67

—

14

Heraenium S
(Heraeus Kulzer)

62.9

—

NPX-III (CMP
Industries)

76.5

Argeloy Bond
(Argen)

FDP, fixed dental prothesis; VHN, Vickers hardness number.
*

Elements without a value are less than 1% by weight.

†

x indicates trace amount.

TABLE 9-6

Tensile Properties and Impurity Limits for Unalloyed (CP) Titanium (ASTM F67)*
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES (MINIMUM)

IMPURITY LIMITS (max), PERCENT BY WEIGHT

Tensile Strength
(MPa)

Yield Strength
(MPa)

Hardness
(VHN)

Elongation
(%)

N

C

H

Fe

O

Grade 1

240

170

126

24

0.03

0.08

0.015

0.20

0.18

Grade 2

340

280

178

20

0.03

0.08

0.015

0.30

0.25

Grade 3

450

380

221

18

0.05

0.08

0.015

0.30

0.35

Grade 4

550

480

263

15

0.05

0.08

0.015

0.50

0.40

Designation

ASTM, American Society for Testing Materials; VHN, Vickers hardness number.
*

Elastic modulus is approximately 110 GPa for each type.

Commercially Pure Titanium
According to the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard F67, there are four unalloyed grades of
commercially pure titanium (CP Ti) based on the concentration of impurities (Table 9-6). The elastic modulus of CP Ti
is comparable to that of tooth enamel and noble alloys, but it
is lower than that of other base-metal alloys (Table 9-5). CP Ti is
often selected for its excellent corrosion resistance, especially in
applications for which high strength is not required. The major
strengthening element is oxygen. Increasing the oxygen content
of CP Ti increases not only the flexural strength but also the
fatigue strength.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Why is a Ti-Al-V alloy with high strength not always preferred to the
commercially pure titanium metal for dental prostheses? How do alloying
elements affect the properties of titanium dental alloys?

Titanium Alloys
CP Ti undergoes an allotropic (polymorphic) transformation from
a hexagonal close-packed crystal structure (α phase) at 882 °C to a
more ductile body-centered crystal structure (β phase). By incorporating a combination of α- and β-phase stabilizers, four possible types of titanium alloys can be produced: α, near-α, α-β, and

178

PA RT I I I

TABLE 9-7

Alloy

Indirect Restorative Materials

Properties of Two α-β Titanium Alloys
for Dental Prostheses
Elastic
Modulus Yield Strength Hardness
(GPa)
(MPa)
(VHN)

CRITICAL QUESTION
How do alloys for all-metal prostheses differ from those required for metalceramic prostheses?

Elongation
(%)

Ti-6Al-4V

117

860

320

10–15

Ti-6Al-7Nb

105

795

330

10

VHN, Vickers hardness number.

β. Alpha-phase stabilizers, such as aluminum, carbon, nitrogen,
and gallium, raise the temperature for transforming α to β phase
on heating. Beta-phase stabilizers, such as molybdenum, cobalt,
nickel, niobium, copper, palladium, tantalum, and vanadium,
lower the temperature for transforming β to α phase on cooling.
Alpha alloys will form no β phase on cooling. Near-alpha alloys will
form a limited amount of β phase on cooling. Alpha-beta alloys are
metastable, which makes them heat-treatable and will contain both
phases at room temperature. Thermal treatment dictates the relative amount of α and β phases and mechanical properties. Beta
alloys contain sufficient beta stabilizers to retain the β phase on
cooling; they can be solution-treated and aged to improve strength.
The most widely used titanium alloy in dentistry and for general engineering applications is Ti-6Al-4V, which is an α-β alloy.
Although this alloy has greater strength than CP Ti, it is not as
attractive for dentistry and biomedical applications because of some
concerns about health hazards from the slow release of aluminum
and vanadium. Vanadium in high doses is highly toxic, and aluminum has been reported to cause potential neurological disorders.
Niobium has not been associated with any known toxic or adverse
reactions in the body and belongs to the same group as vanadium
in the periodic table. Replacing vanadium in Ti-6Al-4V with the
same atomic percentage of niobium yields Ti-6Al-7Nb. Both alloys
are considered to be acceptable for biomedical applications. The
mechanical properties of the two alloys are similar (Table 9-7), and
their corrosion resistance is similar to that of CP Ti. Their elastic
moduli are similar to those of type 4 alloys, and yield strengths
range from those of type 2 to type 5 metallic materials, as described
in ISO 22674 (Table 9-2).

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does the manipulation of titanium alloys differ so much from that for
Co-Cr and Ni-Cr alloys?

Manipulation of Titanium Alloys
The surface of titanium castings after divestment must be ground
and polished to remove surface porosity and the α case for optimal functionality of the final prosthesis. The machinability of titanium and its alloys is generally considered poor because of several
inherent properties of titanium, such as high chemical reactivity,
relatively low thermal conductivity, high strength at high temperature, and low modulus of elasticity.
To eliminate the effect of oxygen during the fabrication of titanium prostheses, CAD-CAM has been used to produce titaniumbased fixed prosthesis frameworks.

Alloys for Metal-Ceramic Prostheses
The chief objections to the use of dental porcelain as a restorative material are its low tensile strength and shear strength
(Chapter 10, Mechanical Properties). A method of minimizing this disadvantage is to bond the porcelain directly to a cast
alloy substructure made to fit the prepared tooth. The process
requires building on the metal substrate a tooth form with
ceramic powder held together by a binder and subjecting the
entire assembly to a heating process called sintering. Sintering
densifies the packed ceramic particles to a solid firmly bonded
to the metal substrate. This system is referred to as the porcelainfused-to-metal (PFM) design. The preferred descriptive term for
this composite system is metal-ceramic, and the metal is called
metal-ceramic alloy. In this section, the requirements of metals,
some representative alloy systems, and issues associated with
these alloys are discussed.

Requirements of Alloys for Metal-Ceramic
Applications
The alloys discussed in this section share at least three common
features: (1) the potential to bond to dental porcelain, (2) solidus
temperature sufficiently high to resist softening during sintering,
and (3) coefficients of thermal contraction compatible with those
of dental porcelain.

Porcelain Bonding to Metals
Porcelain bonding to metal substrate requires adherent oxides
on the surface. The addition of a small quantity of an appropriate base metal to noble and high-noble alloys promotes oxide
formation on the surface. For base-metal alloys, some oxides
may be poorly adherent to the metal substructure, which can
result in porcelain delaminating from the metal substrate. However, the bond strengths for porcelain bonded to base-metal
alloys as determined in vitro have not generally been shown
to be superior or inferior to those of noble-metal alloys. Furthermore, clinical studies have not demonstrated a significant
difference in the failure incidence between metal-ceramic restorations made from base-metal alloys and those fabricated from
high-noble or noble-metal alloys. To produce the optimal metal
oxide characteristics, the manufacturer’s instructions must be
followed precisely.
Solidus Temperature
When an alloy is heated close to its solidus temperature, it
becomes susceptible to deformation under its own mass, which
is known as creep. The degree of creep increases with the size of
the prosthesis and the number of firings required for the porcelain. In the older literature, this creep process is referred to as the
sag of the ceramic alloy (Figure 9-2). All metal-ceramic alloys
should have a solidus temperature that is substantially higher
than the sintering temperature of the porcelain to minimize
creep deformation.

CHAPTER 9

Prepared teeth

What are the benefits and drawbacks of the different types of alloys used for
metal-ceramic prostheses?

High-Noble and Noble Alloys

As-cast metal
framework

Table 9-8 shows some typical high-noble and noble metal–ceramic
alloys. The physical and mechanical properties of representative
alloys are given in Table 9-9.

Distortion after metal
oxidation cycle

Additional distortion
after porcelain firing

SAG

179

CRITICAL QUESTION

Line of
draw

SAG

Metals

Open
margin
Porcelain
veneer
Open
margin

• Figure 9-2 Sag deformation in a fixed dental prosthesis (FDP) framework.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
How can differences in thermal contraction between a metal and its
veneering ceramic affect the resistance to cracking or fracture of the veneer?
Why must a metal for metal-ceramic prostheses have its thermal contraction
coefficient slightly higher than that of its veneering ceramic?

Thermal Compatibility of Metal-Ceramic Systems
The thermal expansion and contraction values of base-metal alloys
are generally similar to those of noble-metal alloys. When a metalceramic prosthesis is cooled from the porcelain sintering temperature,
the metal and its veneering ceramic contract at different rates. Meanwhile, the chemical bond between the metal and the porcelain prevents
the two components from separating; this condition forces the two
components to adjust their respective dimensions during the cooling
cycle. Thus the component that contracts more will be stretched by
the adjacent component, which contracts less; together, the material
that contracts less will be compressed by the other component. Such
changes in dimension result in stresses that act on each of the two
components. The instantaneous stress at a given temperature during
the cooling cycle is termed transient stress, and the stress distribution,
which exists at room temperature, is called the residual stress. When
the prosthesis is cooled, the tensile stress that develops in the porcelain
is of concern. If the transient tensile stresses that develop within porcelain during cooling are insufficient to cause immediate cracking of
the porcelain or delayed cracking after cooling to room temperature,
the combination of a metal-porcelain system is considered thermally
compatible. In fact, a slight thermal contraction mismatch, with a
coefficient of thermal contraction of about 0.5 × 10–6/°C higher for
the metal, is preferred because the mismatch induces residual compressive stress in the porcelain along the bonded interface, which is
protective in nature. This mechanism will be discussed in Chapter 10,
Coefficient of Thermal Expansion Mismatch.

Gold-Platinum-Palladium Alloys
Gold-platinum-palladium alloys produced the first successful
metal-ceramic restorations. Platinum raises the melting temperature. Rhenium (Re) is a grain refiner that increases hardness. Iron
forms an oxide on the surface for porcelain bonding and increases
the proportional limit and strength of the alloy by an FePt3 precipitate. These alloys have adequate elastic modulus, strength,
hardness, and elongation but are low in sag resistance. They are
mostly used for making crowns and three-unit FDPs. Their use
has decreased over time because more economical alloys have been
developed with substantially better mechanical properties.
Gold-Palladium-Silver Alloys
Gold-palladium-silver alloys are economical alternatives to the
Au-Pt-Pd or Au-Pd-Pt alloys. Their excellent tarnish and corrosion resistance and relative freedom from technique sensitivity
have contributed to their long-term success. The higher palladium concentration above those of the Au-Pt-Pd alloys raises the
melting ranges and improves resistance to creep deformation at
elevated temperatures.
Gold-Palladium Alloys
These silver-free alloys are white in color and have a lower thermal contraction coefficient than that of either the Au-Pd-Ag or
Pd-Ag alloys. When used with compatible low-expansion or lowcontraction porcelains, Au-Pd alloys are considered nearly ideal
compared with other noble-metal alloys because these alloys contain no silver, and their surface oxide is virtually indiscernible.
Thus the esthetic quality of metal-ceramic prostheses made with
Au-Pd alloys is comparable to that obtained with Au-Pt-Pd alloys.
The sag resistance of these alloys is somewhat better than that of
Au-Pt-Pd alloys.
Palladium-Gold Alloys
The physical properties of palladium-gold alloys are generally
similar to those of the Au-Pd alloys, and potential thermal contraction concerns for these alloys seem to have been resolved by
changes in the porcelain composition. Few data are available on
their laboratory and clinical performance.
Palladium-Gold-Silver Alloys
Palladium-gold-silver alloys are similar to the Au-Pd-Ag alloys in
their potential for porcelain discoloration. They have a range of
thermal contraction coefficients, which increase with an increase
in silver content.
Palladium-Silver Alloys
This alloy type was the first gold-free noble alloy for metal-ceramic
restorations. The replacement of gold by palladium raises the melting range but lowers the thermal expansion coefficient of the alloy.
Silver, on the other hand, lowers the melting range but increases

180

PA RT I I I

TABLE 9-8

Indirect Restorative Materials

Compositions of Representative High-Noble (HN) and Noble (N) Alloys for Metal-Ceramic Prostheses
PRINCIPAL ELEMENTS (WEIGHT PERCENT)

Alloy Type
Au-Pd-Pt/HN
Au-Pt-Pd/HN
Au-Pt-Ag/HN

Typical Products (Supplier)

Au

Pt

Pd

Ag

Cu

Ga

Balance*

SMG-3 (Dentsply Ceramco)†

81

6

11

—*

—

—

Re; Sn; Fe

86

10

2

—

—

—

In:2

74

9

—

9

4.4

—

Zn; In; Ir

Argedent 75 (Argen)

75

—

12

10

—

—

In:1; Sn:1; Ir

Aspire (Dentsply Ceramco)

52

—

26

17

—

—

Zn; In; Sn; Re

Herabond (Heraeus-Kulzer)

52

—

27

18

0.2

—

Sn:2.7; In; Ir; Re

Olympia (Argen)

52

—

38

—

—

1.5

In:8.5; Ru

Lodestar (Ivoclar Vivadent)

52

—

39

—

—

1.5

In:8.5; Re; Ru

Argedent 65SF (Argen)

65

—

26

—

—

—

In:8.7

Argedent 35SF (Argen)

35

—

57

—

—

4.8

Sn:3; Zn; Ru

Argelite 52+ (Argen)

15

—

52.2

21.5

—

1

In:6; Sn:4

Argelite 75+6 (Argen)

6

—

75

6.5

—

—

In:6; Ga:6

Albabond A (Heraeus-Kulzer)

—

—

57

33

—

—

Sn:6.8; In:3.4; Zn;
Ir; Ru

W-1 (Ivoclar Vivadent)

—

—

53

38

—

—

Sn:8.5; In; Ru; Li

Spartan Plus (Ivoclar Vivadent)

2

—

78.8

—

10

9

Ir; Ge; Li

Argebond 80 (Argen)

—

—

80

5

—

6.3

In:6.5; Sn; Zn:1

Argelite 85 (Argen)

2

—

85

1.2

—

10

In:1.2; Ru

†

Argedent Y86 (Argen)

†

Degunorm (Dentsply Ceramco)
†

Au-Pd-Ag/HN

Au-Pd/HN

Pd-Au/N
Pd-Au-Ag/N

Pd-Ag/N
Pd-Cu-Ga/N
Pd-Ga/N
*

Elements without value are less than 1% by weight.

†

Yellow-color alloy.

TABLE 9-9

Physical and Mechanical Properties of Some High-Noble and Noble Metal–Ceramic Alloys in Table 9-8

Alloy Type

Product Name

Density (g/cm3)

Yield Strength
(MPa; Soft/Hard)

Hardness
(VHN; Soft/Hard)

Elastic Modulus
(GPa)

Elongation
(Soft/Hard) (%)

Au-Pt-Ag

Argedent Y86

18.4

405/469

160/195

76

12/9

Au-Pd-Ag

Herabond

14.5

520/600

220/260

134

12/8

Au-Pd

Olympia

14.4

550

250

124

30

Pd-Au

Argedent 35SF

13.9

510/572

245/245

124

25/20

Pd-Au-Ag

Argelite 75+6

11.4

565/600

250/265

111

32/30

Pd-Ag

Albabond A

11.4

460/540

205/235

122

26/18

Pd-Cu-Ga

Spartan Plus

11.0

740

310

140

10

Pd-Ga

Argebond 80

11.2

585/630

230/245

130

35/28

VHN, Vickers hardness number.

the thermal expansion coefficient. A proper balance of the two elements maintains a reasonably low casting temperature and a compatible thermal expansion coefficient. The thermal compatibility
of these alloys is generally good except with certain low-expansion
porcelains. The addition of tin and indium promotes oxide formation for porcelain bonding and yields precipitates for improving
mechanical properties.

Adherence to porcelain is considered acceptable for most of
the Pd-Ag alloys. However, Mackert et al. reported that one of
these alloy products formed an internal oxide rather than the preferred external oxide. Instead, Pd-Ag nodules developed on the
surface (Figure 9-3) facilitate the retention of porcelain mechanically. This condition has not apparently produced clinical bond
failures to warrant concern, and other Pd-Ag ceramic alloys have

CHAPTER 9

Metals

181

asked to provide precise instructions to ensure sound metal-ceramic
bonding.

CRITICAL QUESTION

Tin oxide
and/or
indium oxide

Pd-Ag
nodules

What are the benefits and drawbacks of using a base-metal casting alloy
versus a noble-metal casting alloy for a metal-ceramic restoration?

Predominantly Base-Metal Alloys
Porcelain

Pd-Ag alloy

1 m
4 m

• Figure 9-3 Internal oxide formation and creep-induced nodule formation in a Pd-Ag alloy for metal-ceramic restorations.

not been studied to determine whether they have similar oxidation behavior.
Because of their high silver content compared with that of
gold-based alloys, the potential silver discoloration effect is most
severe for these alloys. One should proceed with caution when
light shades (higher values) of ceramic are desired.

Palladium-Copper-Gallium Alloys
Compositional differences for the Pd-Cu-Ga alloys result in a
wide range of mechanical properties: yield strengths ranging from
520 MPa to over 1200 MPa, percent elongation ranging from 7%
to 30%, and VHN ranging from approximately 265 to over 400.
Careful composition control by manufacturers has resulted in
Pd-Cu-Ga alloys with VHNs of substantially less than 300.
The dark brown or black oxide formed during oxidation and subsequent porcelain sintering cycles makes it difficult for a technician to
mask the color. Sometimes a thicker opaque porcelain layer is required
to avoid excessive darkness (i.e., low value) with certain porcelains. An
increase in oxide-layer thickness occurs during the initial oxidation
step for these alloys. To reduce the discoloration effect, the surface can
be sandblasted prior to the application of opaque porcelain.
Palladium-Gallium Alloys
The Pd-Ga alloys also have relatively dark oxides, which are somewhat lighter than those on the Pd-Cu-Ga alloys. Pd-Ga alloys generally tend to have relatively low thermal expansion coefficients,
making the alloys more compatible with lower-expansion porcelains. The silver content is generally low and is not sufficient to
cause significant porcelain “greening.”
The effects of several dental laboratory variables (recasting old
alloy, alternative oxidation cycle, stripping and rebonding of porcelain) on porcelain adherence were investigated for one Pd-Ga
alloy, three Pd-Cu-Ga alloys, and one Au-Pd alloy. One finding was
that remelting two and three times degraded porcelain adherence
to the Pd-Ga alloy and one Pd-Cu-Ga alloy. Stripping of the original porcelain did not cause a significant decrease in adherence of
the subsequently applied porcelain. An alternate oxidation procedure from the one recommended by the manufacturer significantly
affected porcelain adherence to one Pd-Cu-Ga alloy and the Au-Pd
alloy. Therefore where there is doubt, the manufacturer should be

Compared with other alloys for metal-ceramic prostheses, the
base-metal alloys (other than titanium and titanium alloys) generally are harder and stiffer (higher elastic modulus) (Tables 9-4 and
9-5); this enables the coping to be 0.1 to 0.2 mm thick without
risking significant deformation under mastication stress or sagging
of the metal framework at the porcelain-firing temperature. The
higher melting temperatures make these alloys more difficult to
cast than the high-noble and noble alloys.

Manipulation of Base-Metal Alloys
Laboratory technicians fabricating base-metal copings for metalceramic prostheses will face the following technical issues: casting
condition, castability, finishing, and controlling oxide layers. The
fusion temperatures of Ni-Cr and Co-Cr alloys are in the range of
1150 to 1500 °C; an acetylene-oxygen flame or an electrical induction heating source is required for melting these alloys. The mold
should be made of either phosphate- or silicate-bonded investment material, which maintains its surface integrity at the casting
temperature of base-metal alloys. The density of a base-metal alloy
is about half that of a gold-based alloy. The lower density reduces
the force of gravity for bulky maxillary appliances on the supporting teeth but also reduces the thrust generated by the casting unit
to force the molten base-metal alloy to fill the mold. The use of
a vent and a larger sprue size than that used for gold-based alloys
may be needed (Chapter 14, Wax Pattern and Sprue Design).
The castability of Co-Cr alloys is in the same range as that
of Ni-Cr alloys without beryllium. Some noble and high-noble
alloys were found to exhibit lower castability than Co-Cr alloys.
In contrast, a study of the marginal accuracy of a high-noble alloy,
four noble alloys, and a Ni-Cr-Be alloy revealed that for all alloys,
marginal completeness was adequate, and marginal openings were
considerably less than 50 μm. Some researchers claim that all
alloys will theoretically produce complete castings under optimal
burnout, melting, and casting conditions.
In general, the high hardness and high strength of these basemetal alloys contribute to certain difficulties of adjusting prostheses. After casting, it is useful to sandblast the prosthesis to remove
investment materials and excessive oxides. Grinding and polishing
of fixed restorations to achieve proper occlusion will occasionally
require more time at chairside. The removal of defective restorations
may also require more time. The potential hazard of dust generated
from the procedure is a concern and is discussed with the biological
hazards of base-metal alloys (Chapter 17, Dental Alloys).
The solidification shrinkages of base-metal alloys are greater
than those of gold-based alloys, which represents a challenge for
technicians to obtain acceptable-fitting base-metal castings. Using
type V die stone for dies and enhancing the expansion of the
investment mold during the setting of the investment are the most
common practices to improve the fit of prostheses (Chapter 14,
Control of Shrinkage Compensation).
The thickness of the oxide layer and the wetting of the oxide
layer by porcelain are important factors in establishing the bonding

182

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

of porcelain to the metal substrate. For the laboratory technician
to produce optimal metal-oxide characteristics, the manufacturer’s
instructions must be followed precisely. However, some instructions
are relatively imprecise. For example, some alloys require a “light”
sandblasting of the oxide layer formed during the initial oxidation
step. The particle size of aluminum oxide abrasive is generally recommended, but neither the quality of abrasive nor the sandblasting
pressure is usually specified. Contamination of the oxide layer with
lower-purity abrasives could degrade the integrity of the interface
between the metal oxide and the opaque porcelain. The ability of
a laboratory technician to discriminate light from moderate sandblasting to reduce the thickness of these surface oxides is one example of the technique sensitivity of base-metal alloys.

Titanium-Based Alloys
As previously discussed, titanium undergoes a phase transformation at 882 °C and exhibits a high rate of oxidation above
900 °C. Therefore a low-fusing ceramic with a sintering temperature below 800 °C should be used to minimize oxidation
and prevent any phase transformation during sintering. The high
melting temperatures of CP Ti and titanium alloys makes them
highly resistant to sag deformation at porcelain-sintering temperatures, and the accompanying relatively low thermal expansion coefficient demands special low-expansion dental porcelains
for bonding to titanium. Because of the α-case formation, caustic NaOH-based solutions or silicon nitride coatings have been
employed to improve the bond between cast CP Ti and dental
porcelain.
In general, in vitro bonding tests show that metal-ceramics
fabricated from noble and base-metal alloys exhibit higher bond
strengths than those of low-fusing porcelain to titanium. However, a small number of studies show that the bond strengths are
not statistically significantly different between the two groups.
Differences in porcelain composition often require different firing temperatures, which may result in bond-strength changes.
However, there is no difference in porcelain bond strength
between CP Ti and titanium alloys. Studies also show that surface
treatment of CP Ti and titanium alloy before porcelain application can improve the bond strength. The treatments include silica
deposition by magnetron sputtering; deposition of an intermediate metallic layer by silver plating; use of an admixture of titanium particles and porcelain as a bonding agent; incorporation
of an intermediate ceramic layer; nitridation of the titanium surface; and surface roughening by a caustic bath, hydrochloric acid,
or sandblasting. Although multiple firing has no effect on bond
strength, firing in an argon atmosphere, which reduces oxide formation, improves the bond strength. It is believed that controlling the thickness and adherence of the oxide is the key to higher
bond strength.
Properties of high-noble and base-metal alloys (including CP
Ti) for metal-ceramic prostheses are listed in Table 9-10.

Mechanical Properties
The elastic modulus of base-metal alloys is twice as much or greater
than those for noble-metal alloys. This property allows the technician to reduce the cross-sectional area of cast interproximal connectors. The rigidity of the prosthesis is proportional to the elastic
modulus and the connector width (buccal-lingual dimension) but
is proportional to the cube of the connector thickness (occlusalgingival dimension). The cubic relationship with the connector
thickness means that when an alloy with an elastic modulus that
is twice as high is used, the connector thickness can be reduced
by 20.6%, while maintaining the same rigidity of the prosthesis.
Using similar reasoning, a reduction of the coping thickness from
0.3 to 0.1 mm may increase the risk of porcelain fracture because
of the increased coping flexibility. However, a finite-element analysis of stresses induced in anterior metal-ceramic crowns under
intraoral forces indicates that a reduction of base-metal coping
thickness (in veneered areas) from 0.3 to 0.1 mm exhibits only a
slight effect on porcelain stresses.
It is a common practice to design the occlusal surface of
metal-ceramic prostheses to be made from cast metal to avoid
excessive wear of the opposing natural dentition. Compared
with the same prostheses made of high-noble or noble alloys, the
hardness of the base-metal alloys makes the occlusal adjustment
slightly more difficult to perform, and the resulting roughness
can cause greater wear of the opposing tooth enamel. Repair of
crowns with fractured porcelain veneers, which may be simply
performed on noble-metal substrates using pin-retained facings
or metal-ceramic onlays, is more difficult to accomplish when
the failed restoration has a framework cast with a nickel- or
cobalt-based alloy.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which factors must be considered by the dental laboratory and dentist for the
preparation and adjustment of RPD frameworks that are cast from base-metal
alloys?

TABLE 9-10 Comparative Properties of High-Noble Alloys and Base-Metal Alloys for Metal-Ceramic Prostheses

Property

High-Noble Alloy

Co-Cr

Biocompatibility

Excellent

Excellent

3

CP Ti

Fair

Excellent

8.7 g/cm

4.5 g/cm3

145–220 GPa

207 GPa

103 GPa

Poor to excellent

Excellent

Excellent

Good

Technique sensitivity

Minimal

Moderately high

Moderately high

Extremely high

Bond to porcelain

Excellent

Fair

Good to excellent

Fair

Metal cost

High

Low

Low

Low*

Density

14 g/cm

7.5 g/cm

Elastic modulus (stiffness)

90 GPa

Sag resistance

*

3

Ni-Cr-Be

3

The dental laboratory costs for fabricating metal-ceramic prostheses are high for CP Ti, and few dental laboratories have the capability of producing Ti prostheses.

CHAPTER 9

TABLE 9-11

Metals

183

Compositions and Mechanical Properties of Selected Base-Metal Alloys for Removable Partial Dentures*
ELEMENTAL COMPOSITION (WEIGHT PERCENT)

Alloy Name
(Supplier)

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

Ni

Co

Cr

Mo

Balance*

Yield Strength
(MPa)

Hardness
(VHN)

Elastic Modulus
(GPa)

Elongation
(%)

Nobilstar (CMP
Industries)

—

65

27.5

5.5

Si; Fe; Mn; C

640

430

193

9

Vitallium
(Dentsply)

—

63.1

28.5

6

Mn; Si; C; N

600

410

200

9

JD (Jelenko
Alloys/Argen)

—

63

28.5

6

Si; C; Mn; Fe; W

620

290

207

5

Heraenium EH
(Heraeus Kulzer)

—

63.5

28

6.5

Si:1; Mn; C; N

620

310

228

7

Suprachrome+
(Argen)

—

63

30

5

Mn; Si; C; N

745

390

200

13

Supercast
(Pentron Alloys/
Argen)

—

64

30

4

Mn; Si; C; N

655

340

228

3.5

Ticonium 100
(CMP Industries)

71.6

x†

16

5

Al: 2.9; Mn: 3.7
Be: 0.8; Ti

790

360

186

7

VHN, Vickers hardness number.
*

Elements without value are less than 1% by weight.

†

x indicates trace amount.

Alloys for Removable Partial Dentures
RPDs have four major metal components: connectors, rests,
clasps, and mesh bases. Except for clasps, each component should
be rigid and resist permanent deformation, which suggests a material of high elastic modulus and yield strength. Table 9-11 lists the
compositions and mechanical properties of selected base-metal
alloys for RPDs. The density of these alloys ranges from 7.6 to
8.3 g/cm3. For clasps, the material must be resistant to permanent deformation, flexible to engage undercuts, and possess sufficient ductility to facilitate adjustment without fracture. Ideally,
the clasps should be made of gold-based type 4 alloy because of its
lower elastic modulus, good ductility, and adequate yield strength
(Table 9-4), and then soldered (discussed later) to the remaining
framework made of a base-metal alloy. This arrangement, however, inevitably promotes corrosion at the soldered (brazed) joint
(Chapter 3, Dissimilar Metals). Although gold-based clasps can
be embedded in the denture base resin to avoid corrosion at the
solder joint, in practice, RPDs are cast in one piece using the same
alloy. The effect of the high elastic modulus of the base-metal
alloy on the flexure and retention of the clasps can be adequately
addressed by reducing the clasp thickness. The situation is similar
to that discussed for FDPs.

Predominantly Base-Metal Alloys
Cobalt-chromium-molybdenum alloy has been the primary
metal for RPD prostheses. Cobalt increases the elastic modulus
and strength. Inclusion of greater than 30% chromium by weight
makes the alloy difficult to cast and forms the brittle σ phase.
Molybdenum and manganese improve the corrosion resistance of
the alloy. Carbide formation provides a high yield strength and

hardness in the alloy but lowers ductility. Particular concerns are
the higher hardness of some alloys, which can cause in vivo wear of
the enamel; the need for special finishing in the dental laboratory;
and the tendency of these alloys to undergo rapid work hardening.
Co-Cr alloy clasps are reported to be too retentive initially and
to slowly lose this retention because of permanent deformation
from repeated seating and removal of the appliance, which correspond to cyclic fatigue conditions. Caution is needed by the dental laboratory technician or the clinician in adjusting clasps on the
cast framework to avoid fracture, even for RPD alloys that exhibit
higher values of percent elongation.
Because of the high melting temperatures, these base-metal
alloys are induction-melted and cast using phosphate- or silicatebonded investments, as recommended by the manufacturer, to
compensate for their high casting shrinkage and to minimize the
potential for casting defects.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Because titanium alloy has an elastic modulus comparable to that of gold,
how can the stiffness of an RPD made from this titanium alloy be increased
to the same level of stiffness as a cobalt-chromium RPD?

Titanium-Based Alloys
CP Ti and titanium alloys have occasionally been used to make
RPD frameworks because of the excellent biocompatibility, outstanding corrosion resistance, and good mechanical properties.
Because of the low elastic modulus, compared with that of basemetal alloys, the rigidity of the connector is often improved by
increasing the thickness or changing the design. Increasing the
rigidity also reduces debonding between the resin base and the

184

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

metal framework. In addition, the lower yield strength and higher
percent elongation of CP Ti suggest that cast clasps may be easily
adjusted.
Laboratory casting of titanium remains a challenge because
internal porosity within the clasp assemblies can lead to clasp fracture. The reaction layer on the surface must be removed chemically with hydrofluorosilicic acid or mechanically by sandblasting
and rotary instruments.
The strong binding and high electrostatic character of the titanium surface oxide may result in higher plaque adherence to titanium frameworks compared with other base-metal frameworks. A
clinical survey of RPDs revealed gradual discoloration of titanium
alloy frameworks, whereas those made with CP Ti and other basemetal alloys did not discolor. It was hypothesized that aluminum
segregates from the titanium alloy (Ti-6Al-4V) during casting
and corrodes during service; further research is needed to verify
this hypothesis. An in vitro study has also revealed that exposing
titanium alloys to alkaline denture cleansers (pH greater than 11)
causes discoloration. Laser welding of titanium has facilitated the
repair of titanium frameworks because of the low thermal conductivity of titanium and localized heating during laser welding. This
is also true for the Co-Cr and Ni-Cr alloys.

TABLE 9-12 Linear Solidification Shrinkage of

Casting Alloys
Alloy Type

Casting Shrinkage (%)

Type 1 (Au-based)

1.56

Type 2 (Au-based)

1.37

Type 3 (Au-based)

1.42

Type 4 (Ni-CR–based)

2.30

Type 4 (Co-Cr–based)

2.30

Technologies are currently available for fabricating metallic prostheses without metal melting and the associated casting
shrinkage. Except for RPD frameworks, most metal prostheses
can be made by one or more of the following methods: (1) sintering (or diffusion bonding) of burnished metal foil, (2) CADCAM processing of metal blocks, (3) copy milling of metal blocks,
and (4) electroforming of metal copings. A fifth method, which
has become highly popular worldwide, 3-D printing with selective
laser melting of metal powder, can be used to fabricate most metal
prostheses, including RPD frameworks.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the merits and concerns of using alternative techniques other than
casting for fabricating prostheses from dental alloys?

Alternative Technologies for Fabricating
Prostheses
Shrinkage of the dental casting alloy in an investment mold occurs
in three stages: (1) the thermal contraction of the liquid metal
cooling to its liquidus temperature (Figure 2-17), (2) the phase
change from the liquid to the solid state (solidus temperature),
and (3) the thermal contraction of the solid metal from the solidus
temperature to room temperature (Figure 2-17). The linear solidification shrinkage of an alloy resulting from thermal contraction
differs from the casting shrinkage for dental alloys because of the
effect of the investment surrounding the solidifying casting.
The first-stage contraction is of no consequence to the final
dimensions of the casting because the molten metal flows freely and
fills the mold. For the second-stage contraction, the solidification
starts at the walls of the mold, and the first layer of metal tends to
adhere to the mold, while the liquid metal continues to be fed from
the reservoir, which results in no contraction of the casting relative to the investment mold. As the casting cools, it gains sufficient
strength to contract independently of the mold. Any contraction
of the casting from this point will affect the fit of the prosthesis.
Finally, the casting shrinks thermally until it reaches room temperature. Because the thermal contraction coefficient of the metal casting is higher than that of the investment mold, the size of the final
casting will be smaller than that of the investment mold, which is an
accurate reproduction of the missing tooth structure. The difference
in dimensions is called casting shrinkage and normally is compensated for by the setting and thermal expansion of the investment
used (Chapter 14, Investment Materials). Table 9-12 lists the linear
solidification shrinkage of various alloys cast as smooth cylinders.
Because the contraction of the alloy as it cools to room temperature
dominates the casting shrinkage, the higher-melting alloys tend to
exhibit greater shrinkage.

Sintering of Burnished Foil
The most commonly used commercial foil system, Captek (Leach
& Dillon, North Attleboro, MA), is used for making copings or
frameworks for metal-ceramic prostheses. The protocol and guidelines for the Captek system are found in an article in the Selected
Readings section. The main advantage of Captek crowns is their
very low thickness, which ensures minimal tooth reduction or
improved esthetics compared with conventional metal-ceramic
crowns made with cast metal copings. For the construction of a
multiple-unit FDP, a connector for the two abutment copings is
waxed and cast with a recommended gold alloy. The copings are
then joined with the connector using furnace soldering, electrical
welding, or laser welding before the porcelain application.

CAD-CAM Processing
The dental application of CAD-CAM became available in the early
1980s to produce ceramic inlays and crowns during one chairside
appointment. This technology has been improved and expanded,
and computer-aided milling or grinding of a metal or a ceramic
block can be performed accurately by a CAD-CAM process or by
electrolytic or electrical discharge removal of metal. The CAD-CAM
technique can be used to prepare prostheses from CP Ti or titanium
alloy, which do not contain bulk casting defects or the hard α case
found near the surface of cast titanium prostheses. More about the
CAD-CAM process is provided in Chapter 15, Prototyping Tools.

Copy Milling
The copy-milling process is based on the principle of tracing the
surface of a resin prosthesis pattern, which is then replicated on
a blank of ceramic, composite, or metal that is ground, cut, or
milled by a rotating wheel whose motion is controlled by a link
through the tracing device. The process is similar to that associated
with cutting a key blank using a tracing of a master key. One commercial system of this type (Celay, Mikrona Technologies, Spreitenbach, Switzerland) has been in use since 1991. The pattern

CHAPTER 9

to be traced is made from a blue-colored, resin-based composite
(Celay-Tech, ESPE, Seefeld/Oberbayern, Germany).

Electroforming
A master cast of the prepared tooth (teeth) is prepared and coated
with a special die spacer to facilitate separation of the duplicating
material. The dies are duplicated with a gypsum product that has a
setting expansion of 0.1% to 0.2%. After a conductive silver layer
is applied to its surface, the die is connected to a plating head, and
then to a power source and placed in a plating solution. After a
sufficiently thick layer of gold or other metal is deposited, the gypsum is removed, and the coping is sandblasted. The coping is then
coated with a bonding agent during the wash bake, and subsequent
ceramic layers are condensed and sintered in a conventional way.
As is true for the burnished foil system, a cast pontic is needed
for joining electroformed copings to construct multiple-unit
prostheses.

Metals

185

the CAD-CAM milling method, and (4) the direct laser metal
sintering method. Initial results indicate that the best fit was
exhibited by group 4, followed by groups 2, 1, and 3. A review
published in 2020 shows that the total gap of single-crown soft
milling had the highest accuracy, and for multi-unit FDPs, additive manufactured restorations had the highest accuracy.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the differences between soldering, brazing, and welding?

Joining of Dental Alloys

Manufacturer

Co

Cr

Mo

Si

Mn

Fe

SINT-TECH,
France1

Balance
(max. 62.5)

29

5.5

<1

<1

<1

There are three categories of metal-joining operations: soldering,
brazing, and welding. The soldering and brazing processes for the
metallic components (also called substrate metals) to be joined
always employ a filler metal (usually called solder), along with a
flux and a heat source. Brazing is conducted above 450 °C, and
soldering is conducted below that temperature. Both processes are
performed below the solidus temperature of the substrate metal
or metals; there is no melting at the workpiece surfaces. The term
soldering is used in this section as a general term to describe both
processes. Welding may not require a filler metal because the
metal surfaces to be joined melt and fuse locally. The common
characteristic of these operations is the achievement of bonding
between the workpieces and/or the filler metals by a controlled
heating procedure.
Metal-joining processes in dentistry have traditionally been
dominated by the gold-based alloys, and soldering (or brazing)
using a flame torch has been the main process. With the newer
nongold alloys, the requirements of the metal-joining process differ among the alloys used. For example, titanium alloys oxidize
readily at elevated temperatures, and an oxygen-free environment
and a nonoxygen heating source are needed.
Spot welding based on electrical resistance has been used to
weld alloys of low thermal conductivity, such as orthodontic
appliances. New advances in the technology of heating sources
have been adapted for orthodontic and other dental applications.
They include the plasma torch, Nd:YAG laser, and tungsten-inert
gas (TIG) arc. The advantages of these technologies are that the
area of heating is small—it can be 0.2 mm with the laser and
TIG—and the duration of heating can be controlled. When the
area of heating is very small, the thermal conductivity of the alloy
can be of concern. High thermal conduction dissipates the thermal energy needed for melting the substrate metal. The very small
area of heating is advantageous for Co-Cr and titanium alloys,
which have lower thermal conductivities than gold-based alloys.
Although the advantages of modern heating sources have
shifted the operation of metal joining in dental laboratories
toward welding, gold soldering is a simpler procedure that can be
conducted in the dental office.

Epson Atmix,
Japan2

Balance
(approx. 63.5)

29

6

<1

<1

<1

CRITICAL QUESTION

Three-Dimensional Printing
The process of 3-D printing is a form of additive manufacturing
technology where a 3-D object is created by depositing successive layers of material. This technology is now being widely used
with metal powders to fabricate dental restorations and prostheses. As described in Chapter 15, Additive Manufacturing—
3D Printing, the metal powder is first spread across the working
platform. A laser traces the outline of each part being printed,
and metal powder is fused to the layer below it. As the platform
is lowered, a new layer of material is spread across the platform,
and the process is repeated until the printing process is completed. This process is called selective laser melting or direct laser
metal sintering. For dental applications, the metal powder can be
titanium, Co-Cr alloy, or a noble metal. The powder compositions for two Co-Cr alloys used for selective laser melting are
shown in Table 9-13, and it can be seen that these powder compositions are very similar to the compositions of the base-metal
casting alloys shown in Table 9-11. Additional technologies are
discussed in Chapter 15, Prototyping Tools.
Örtorp et al. reported the marginal and internal fit among
three-unit Co-Cr-based FDPs using four fabrication techniques:
(1) the traditional lost wax casting method, (2) CAD-CAM milling of a wax pattern followed by the lost wax casting method, (3)

TABLE 9-13

Powder Compositions for Two Co-Cr
Alloys Used for Selective Laser Melting

Why should the flow of flux be restricted, and what kind of material is used?

1

Al Jabbari YS, Barmpagadaki X, Psarris I, Zinelis S: Microstructural, mechanical, ionic
release and tarnish resistance characterization of porcelain fused to metal Co-Cr alloys
manufactured via casting and three different CAD/CAM techniques, J Prosthodont Res.
63:150–156, 2019.
2

Takaichi A, Suyalatu, Nakamoto T, et al: Microstructures and mechanical properties of
Co-29Cr-6Mo alloy fabricated by selective laser melting process for dental applications,
J Mech Behav Biomed Mater. 21:67–76, 2013.

Soldering Flux
A metal surface free of any contaminant, such as oxides, is essential for establishing metallic bonds between substrate metals. A
flux is needed, and it has three primary functions: (1) dissolve
surface oxides, (2) reduce existing oxides to pure elements, and (3)

186

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

protect the surface from oxidation during soldering. The solder
chosen must wet the metal substrate to be joined. To prevent the
flow of molten solder onto adjacent areas, an antiflux, such as
rouge mixed with chloroform or graphite, can be painted on these
areas before heating the substrate metals.
Fluxes for use with noble-metal alloys are generally based on
boric acid, boric anhydride, and borax. Chromium oxides that
form on base-metal alloys are more stable, and fluoride-containing
fluxes are needed to dissolve chromium, nickel, and cobalt oxides.
Fluxes are also available for different temperature ranges to provide optimal activity.
The amount of flux used should be minimized because entrapment of flux within the filler metal can cause a weakened joint.
Residual flux that is covered with porcelain can cause discoloration
and bubbling of the porcelain. Flux combines with metal oxides
and forms a glass during the soldering process, and the residue
should be removed. After the soldering process, sandblasting the
joint with alumina abrasive particles immediately after removal
from the soldering investment and boiling in water are needed to
remove glassy residue resulting from the reaction between the flux
and oxides.

Filler Metal for Soldering
The filler metals should have acceptable color, adequate hardness
and strength, and tarnish and corrosion resistance relative to the
workpieces. Fillers and substrates do not need to have similar
compositions, but the filler metals should have (1) a sufficiently
low flow temperature, (2) the ability to wet the substrate metal,
and (3) sufficient fluidity at the flow temperature.

Flow Temperature
When the filler metal melts, wets, and flows on the substrate metal,
it bonds to this workpiece. The flow temperature of the filler metal
is usually higher than its liquidus temperature to provide suitable
viscosity and must be sufficiently lower than the solidus temperature
of the substrate metal that melting of the substrate does not occur.
For an alloy substrate that will be veneered with porcelain after soldering, the melting range of the filler metal should be higher than
the sintering temperature of the porcelain to avoid sag deformation
of the bridge framework during subsequent porcelain firing.
Wetting
Recall the discussion of the role of wetting in Chapter 2, Wetting.
Wetting of the substrate metal by the molten filler metal is essential
to produce a metallic bond. Oxides have poor wettability characteristics; therefore molten metal does not spread on the oxide layer
of substrate metals. That is the reason why iron oxide is used as
antiflux.
Fluidity
Molten filler metals should flow freely into the gap between the
two substrate metals. When the surface of a metal prosthesis needs
to be extended, such as for a deficient interproximal contact area,
a filler metal can be used to build up the area. A filler metal with
relatively sluggish fluidity then becomes desirable. This type of
filler usually has a wide melting range, and flow can be controlled
to well-defined areas.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can one best assess if the quality of a solder joint is acceptable or not?

TABLE 9-14 Thermal Characteristics of Fuel-Gas

Combustion
Flame Temperature (°C)

Heat Content (kcal/m3)

Hydrogen

2,660

2,362

Natural gas

2,680

8,898

Propane

2,850

21,221

Acetylene

3,140

12,884

Fuel

Heat Sources for Soldering
The most common instrument for the application of heat is a gasair or gas-oxygen torch. All gases shown in Table 9-14 have potential flame temperatures high enough to melt any dental casting
alloy currently in use. The thermal energy (heat content measured
in calories per cubic meter of the fuel) from the combustion of
the fuel must not only raise the temperature of both the substrate
metal and the filler metal to the soldering temperature but also
compensate for heat loss to the surroundings. Fuel with a lower
heat content requires a longer period of heating at the desired temperature and is associated with an increased danger of oxidation
during the soldering process.
Of the fuel gases in Table 9-14, the best choice is propane.
Butane, which is more readily available in some parts of the world,
has a similar flame temperature and heat content as propane. Both
propane and butane have the advantage of being relatively pure
compounds; therefore they are uniform in quality, are virtually
water-free, and burn cleanly (provided that the torch flame is
properly adjusted). With acetylene, which should only be used by
an experienced dental laboratory technician, concerns are localized
variations in flame temperature and the tendency for decomposition into carbon and hydrogen, with the incorporation of carbon
in both nickel and palladium solders degrading the mechanical
properties of the joints.
Another source of heating is a furnace that heats the assembled
substrate metals along with flux and solder deposited at the joining site to an appropriate temperature for melting and flow of
solder. Before the assembled substrate metals are placed into the
oven, a uniform coating of a paste flux should be applied to the
surface to be soldered. The advantage of furnace soldering is that
every component can be heated and cooled uniformly in accordance with a precise schedule that prevents distortion, which
might occur under localized heating, such as during soldering of
metal-ceramic bridges.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Which type of torch gas should be used for soldering noble alloys? Why is it
not possible to use all torch gases?

Technique Considerations for Soldering
For fixed prostheses, where accurate alignment is needed, investment soldering is used, in which the parts to be joined are first
indexed and joined by a temporary material, such as acrylic resin
or sticky wax, and then mounted in a soldering investment, which
holds the parts together during the soldering procedure. In contrast, freehand soldering is used for assembling orthodontic and

CHAPTER 9

Cold mixing zone
(unburned gas)

Partial combustion
zone (oxidizing)

Reducing zone

Metals

187

Oxidizing zone
(burned gas)

• Figure 9-4 Flame zones in a propane-oxygen torch flame.

some other appliances, in which the parts to be joined are manually held in contact during the soldering procedure. As soon as
the filler metal has flowed to the desired position, the heating is
discontinued, and the appliance is cooled.
The investment soldering technique involves several critical steps: (1) cleaning and preparing the surfaces to be joined,
(2) assembling the parts to be joined, (3) preparation and fluxing of the gap surfaces between the parts, (4) maintaining the
proper position of the parts during the procedure, (5) control of
the proper temperature, and (6) control of the time to ensure adequate flow of solder and complete filling of the solder joint. Many
of these steps are applicable to freehand soldering.
Other factors that may influence the result of soldering are discussed next.

Gap Width
The gap between the parts of the substrate metal to be joined must
be sufficient to allow solder flow between the workpieces. If the gap
is too great, the joint strength will be dictated by the strength of the
filler metal. If the gap is too narrow, flux inclusions and porosity
caused by incomplete flow of the filler metal may occur and lead
to decreased strength. Inclusions or porosity can lead to distortion
if any heating, such as porcelain application, takes place after the
soldering operation. The ideal gap width is about 0.13 mm.
Flame
A torch flame can be divided into four zones, as shown in
Figure 9-4. The portion of the flame used to heat the soldering
assembly should be the tip of the reducing zone, in which the
most efficient burning process occurs and the most heat is generated. An improperly adjusted torch or improperly positioned
flame can lead to oxidation of the substrate or filler metal and
result in a poor solder joint. It is also possible to introduce carbon
into the substrate and filler metal by using the unburned gas portion of the flame. To prevent oxidation, the flame should not be
removed once it has been applied to the joint area until the soldering process has been completed. The flame provides protection
from oxidation, especially at the soldering temperature.
Temperature and Time
The flame or furnace chamber should provide enough heat to the
substrate metal to reach the flow temperature of the filler metal.
Then the substrate metal will be hot enough to melt the filler
metal as soon as it contacts the area to be joined.
Temperature and time control the diffusion of atoms across
the filler–substrate interface. Alloying can take place by diffusion if the temperature remains constant for a sufficiently long
time. An alloy formed at the interface of the substrate metal
and filler metal through diffusion can have properties different from those of the filler metal and the substrate metal.

• Figure 9-5 Joining of two different substrate metals with the filler metal
(in center). Left, Good bonding with no alloying between the filler metal
and substrate metal. Right, A nodular region of alloying that has occurred
at the interface between the filler metal and another substrate alloy, which
is not distinct in this micrograph. (Courtesy Clyde E. Ingersoll.)

Figure 9-5 shows such a soldered joint between two different
substrate metals. On the left side, the filler–substrate interface
is represented by a sharply defined plane. On the right side,
the substrate metal appears to have alloyed with the solder at
the joint surface adjacent to the nodular area (to the right of the
solder boundary).
Therefore the flame should be maintained in place until the
filler metal has flowed completely into the connection and a short
time longer to allow the flux or oxide to separate from the fluid
filler metal.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What kind of heating source and surrounding environment are needed for
joining titanium components?

Laser Welding of Commercially Pure Titanium
As previously noted, CP Ti is a highly reactive metal that oxidizes
readily in air. At temperatures used for soldering procedures, the
thickness of the titanium oxide layer increases, and it may spontaneously debond from the parent metal surface at temperatures
exceeding 850 °C. Thus the quality of the soldered joint is quite
variable if a traditional torch-soldering or oven-soldering procedure is used.

188

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

Laser welding in an argon atmosphere is a method of choice
for joining titanium components of dental prostheses because
the coherent, high-intensity laser light can be focused on a small
region and melt the substrate without extensive microstructural
damage to the surrounding areas. An advantage of welding is
that the joint will be composed of the same pure titanium as the
substrate components, thereby preserving the excellent biocompatibility potential of CP Ti and avoiding the risk of galvanic corrosion effects within the prosthesis.

CRITICAL QUESTION

1

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

2

A

τ1

Why does the ductility of a pure metal depend on its crystal structure?

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

τ1

B

Wrought Alloys and Plastic Deformation of
Metals
The term wrought alloys refers to solid cast alloys that have been
mechanically shaped to specific configurations. The process causes
alteration of the cast alloy microstructures and results in significant
changes in the mechanical properties. The most notable changes
are the increase of the yield strength or proportional limit with a
reduction of ductility. This segment reviews the crystal structure
of alloys, describes mechanisms of plastic deformation, and identifies correlations between microstructural features and mechanical
properties.

τ2

C

1

Theoretical and Observed Shear Strengths of
Metals
An atomic model illustrating permanent deformation of a metal
having a perfect crystalline structure subjected to an applied shear
stress is shown in Figure 9-6. Notice that the deformation or slip
process requires the simultaneous displacement of plane 1 atoms
relative to the plane 2 atoms. Studies have shown that theoretical shear strengths are much higher than those observed from
mechanical testing of polycrystalline metals. For example, the differences for copper is about 35 times (7.7 GPa vs. 220 MPa), and
iron is about 44 times (12.8 GPa vs. 290 MPa). The difference can
be as much as 190 times greater for the ceramic SiC (31.8 GPa vs.
170 MPa). In contrast to polycrystalline materials, monocrystalline whisker specimens, which are short fibrous single crystals of
metals or ceramics that achieve near perfect atomic lattice, exhibit
shear strengths approaching their theoretical values. The key difference between whiskers and polycrystalline specimens of the
same material is the presence of crystal imperfections at the atomic
level in the polycrystalline material.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are the observed strengths of metals always lower than the theoretical
strengths?

Crystal Imperfections
Recall Figure 2-16, which illustrates an ideal crystallization that
leads to a polycrystalline structure. In reality, the growth is likely
to be random and imperfect. When lattice positions have missing
atoms, displaced atoms, or extra atoms, these sites are called point
defects. The edge of an extra plane of atoms in the crystal is called

τ2

2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

D
• Figure 9-6 Slip between adjacent planes of atoms. A, The configuration of planes 1 (a atoms) and 2 (b atoms) when the solid is not
stressed. B, Application of a shear stress τ1 causes plane 1 to move
with respect to plane 2. C, Increasing the shear stress to τ2 increases
the relative lateral displacement of the two planes. This configuration
corresponds to the state of maximum stored elastic energy. D, The
two planes have now been displaced by one interatomic distance with
respect to each other. This configuration will be maintained if the load
is removed. If the shear stress (τ2) remains, the planes will continue to
slip past each other.

a line defect. The grain boundaries on the external surface of the
crystal are considered two-dimensional (2-D) imperfections in the
crystal.

Point Defects
Point defects are very localized disruptions in the regularity of a
lattice (Figure 9-7). A vacancy or vacant atom site in a crystalline
lattice may occur at a single site in the atomic arrangement. Foreign atoms may be present on the lattice by substituting the lattice
site atoms and are known as substitutional defects in the crystal
structure of pure metal. The size of substitutional atom may be
larger or smaller than that of the normal atom in the lattice. An
interstitial defect is produced if smaller-size atoms (such as, H, B,
C, N, O) is present in the interstitial site. The vacancies provide
the principal mechanism for atomic diffusion in crystalline materials. The mechanical properties of metals are also sensitive to the
presence of point defects because of their interactions with dislocations discussed in the following section.

CHAPTER 9

Metals

189

x

• Figure 9-7 Point defects. “x” marks vacancy where atom is missing from the lattice. The atomic lattice can be occupied by other atoms of larger radius (green sphere) or smaller radius (blue sphere) than
the atoms of host lattice, both are known as substitutional defects. Small size atom (dark solid sphere)
occupying the interstitial space is known as interstitial defect. Note that all point defects distort the surrounding lattice.

Force

Force

Dislocation
line

Unit step of slip
Force

A

B

Force

C

• Figure 9-8 Illustration and movement of edge dislocation. A, An edge dislocation in a schematic cubic
crystal structure. B, The dislocation has moved one interatomic distance along the slip plane under the
action of the shearing force indicated by the arrows. C, The dislocation has reached the edge of the crystal, and a unit amount of slip has been produced. (Taken from Callister WD, Jr, Rethwisch DG: Materials
science and engineering: an introduction, 8th ed, Hoboken, NJ, John Wiley & Sons, 2010.)

Line Defects (Dislocations)
The simplest type of line defect or dislocation, known as an
edge dislocation, is illustrated in Figure 9-8, A for a simple cubic
structure. It can be noted that the atomic arrangement is regular
except for the single vertical plane of atoms that is discontinuous. The edge dislocation (symbolized by ⊥) is located at the
edge of the partial plane. If the atoms have a helical arrangement around the dislocation line (analogous to spiral ramps in
a parking garage), such arrangement is called screw dislocation
(Figure 9-9).
If a sufficiently large shear stress is applied across the top and
bottom faces of the crystal containing the edge dislocation shown
in Figure 9-8, A, the bonds in the row of atoms adjacent to the
dislocation will be broken, and new bonds with the next row will
be established, resulting in movement of the dislocation by one
interatomic distance, as indicated in Figure 9-8, B. Continued
application of this shear stress causes similar movements of one
interatomic distance until the dislocation reaches the boundary of
the crystal (Figure 9-8, C). The plane along which an edge dislocation moves is known as a slip plane. The result of this dislocation
movement across the crystal is that the atomic planes on one side
of the slip plane have been displaced one interatomic spacing with
respect to the atomic planes on the other side of the slip plane. The
crystallographic direction in which the atomic planes have been

Screw dislocation

• Figure 9-9 Illustration of screw dislocation. A crystal defect characterized by a unit distortion of part of the crystal lattice in a particular direction
such that the lattice planes perpendicular to that direction form continuous
helical sheets.

190

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

displaced is termed the slip direction, and the combination of a slip
plane and a slip direction is termed a slip system. The screw dislocation is more difficult to visualize than the edge dislocation and is
discussed in textbooks on engineering materials science. Dislocations in metallic materials often have a mixed character, consisting
of both edge and screw components.

The inherent ability of a metal to deform plastically and exhibit
ductility increases with the number of slip systems associated
with the crystal structure. The number of slip systems in common crystal structures is in the decreasing order of face-centered
cubic (FCC; e.g., gold, silver, copper, nickel), body-centered cubic
(BCC, e.g., α-iron, chromium), and then hexagonal close-packed
(e.g., cobalt, zinc).
Evidently, much less shear stress is required to initiate permanent deformation of the metal crystals that contain edge dislocations (Figure 9-8) because only one row of atomic bonds along the
slip plane is broken at a time, compared with the perfect crystal,
where atomic bonds across the entire slip plane (Figure 9-6) must
be simultaneously broken for shear deformation to occur. The proportional limit for a metal generally corresponds to the onset of
significant movement of dislocations. The slip lines in Figure 9-10
correspond to slip planes where large numbers of dislocations have
exited the metal, causing surface offsets that scatter the light used
for observation. Thus one can conclude that permanent deformation of a metal is the result of dislocation movement and slip
between atomic planes.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What fundamental strengthening mechanisms are available for alloys that are
not possible for pure metals?

Dislocation Movement in Polycrystalline Alloys

• Figure 9-10 Photomicrograph of cold-worked gold, showing deformed grains and slip lines (the parallel lines within grains) at surface
offsets where dislocations have exited their slip planes (×100). (Courtesy
S. D. Tylman.)

A

B

Figures 9-8 and 9-11, A illustrate one dislocation moving in a pure
metal crystal; it appears that there is little hindrance of a moving
dislocation along its slip plane. In reality, there are several scenarios in which dislocation movement can be impeded in pure metals
and alloys. Alloys contain multiple phases, such as solid solutions
and/or precipitates (Chapter 2, Liquid-to-Solid Transformation of
Cast Metals), in addition to the numerous dislocations and grain

C

• Figure 9-11 Effect of precipitates on the movement of edge dislocation. The illustrations depict the view
taken from the top of the three-dimensional (3-D) model shown in Figure 9-8. Each line with right-pointing
arrows represents a line defect (dislocation) moving toward the right side of the grain. A, A dislocation
moves without any impediment within a grain; no extra effort is needed, and no strengthening effect occurs. B, The blue and slightly larger sphere represents a solute atom or coherent precipitate that presents
an obstacle to the movement of the dislocation; bending of the line defect implies that the movement has
been impeded, and more stress is needed to pass through the obstacle. C, The dark spheres represent
incoherent precipitates, and the background simulates the rest of the grain. The dislocation cannot pass
through the incoherent precipitate because it does not share the same lattice with the hosting grain. The
first dislocation (left) bends as it moves close to the precipitate. The second dislocation (middle) continues
to bend around the precipitate, while the rest of the dislocation keeps moving toward the right. Finally, the
dislocation (right) completes its encircling around the precipitate; the rest of the dislocation rejoins and
moves on through the nonstrengthened area.

CHAPTER 9

boundaries found in pure metals. These crystal structural features
represent obstacles that may be overcome by an application of
increased stress to promote dislocation movement.
For solid-solution alloys, the atomic arrangement near solute
atoms is locally distorted. The movement of dislocations along
the slip plane will be impeded by the presence of such solute
atoms (Figure 9-11, B). Precipitates can be coherent, where the
atomic bonds are continuous across the interface with the solidsolution matrix, or incoherent, where interatomic bonds are not
continuous across the interface. Coherent precipitates have the
same crystal structure as the matrix phase and generate localized
distortion in the atomic arrangement. Dislocations cannot
move through incoherent precipitates but instead form loops
of increasing size around these particles (Figure 9-11, C). Additional stress is needed to move dislocations through distorted
regions, including coherent precipitates, or around incoherent
precipitates.
Metals with a sufficient amount of ductility can be permanently deformed under mechanical stress at temperatures below
their recrystallization temperatures (including room temperature), as discussed later. This process, also known as cold working,
can create vast numbers of point defects and dislocations within
the metals. These dislocations will interact with each other, mutually impeding their movements. Increased stress is required for
further dislocation movement to continue the permanent deformation process.
The movement of a dislocation from one grain into another
grain is unlikely, especially if the adjacent grain is misaligned
(Figure 9-12). Grain boundaries represent the ends of slip
planes where dislocations cease to move and accumulate. As
the grain size decreases, there will be more grain boundary area
per unit volume to impede dislocation motion. Grain size can
be controlled by rapid cooling or quenching or by the inclusion of a grain-refining element (Chapter 2, Grain Refinement
and Grain Size), such as iridium in gold alloys. Cold working
also alters the shapes of grains substantially (e.g., the grains are
severely elongated parallel to the wire axis).

Grain boundary

Metals

191

A higher stress, which is reflected in higher values of proportional limit, is needed for dislocations to overcome each impeding
mechanism to continue moving along the slip plane. Therefore
these obstacles are considered mechanisms for the strengthening
of metal alloys that include solid-solution strengthening, precipitation hardening, strain (or work) hardening, and grain-refinement strengthening. The elastic moduli of the wrought alloys
remain the same as those of their cast counterparts because there
are no changes in the crystalline structure. If a phase change has
occurred in the alloy in the process, some change in the elastic
modulus is expected.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does the clasp of an RPD fracture easily after a patient has bent it back
and forth repeatedly to relieve discomfort?

Effects of Strengthening Metals
The ductility of the wrought alloys is decreased with each of the
strengthening mechanisms just described. The corrosion resistance
of the wrought alloys is also decreased because the dislocations
produce localized regions of strain at the atomic level, which have
higher energy than atomic arrangements in the undeformed metal.
Corrosion is a process that relieves stored energy (Chapter 3, Stress
Corrosion), and it can be minimized by stress relief (discussed
later).
One can observe from the first row of photomicrographs of
Figure 9-13 that the thinner the specimen becomes from rolling,
as designated above each photomicrograph, the flatter or thinner
the grains appear to be. Although brass is used in this example,
the same effect would occur with wrought dental alloys. For the
extreme example of a wire, the grains will be elongated parallel to
the wire axis and resemble “strands of spaghetti” in a photomicrograph showing a longitudinal section.
Recall the example we used in the introduction of Chapter 4
regarding the adjustment of the retentive clasps. We can conclude
that the crystal deformation generates dislocations, which can be
moved with finger pressure on the clasp. The movements of the
dislocations allow us to shape the clasp as needed. The region near
the missing half-plane of the edge dislocation can be thought of as
a linear vacancy within the crystal structure. These regions accumulate when there is an edge dislocation pileup at a grain boundary
and grow to a flaw of critical size. Meanwhile, greater force is needed
to overcome obstacles within the alloy. Eventually, the force applied
is high enough to cause crack propagation, and then fracture.

CRITICAL QUESTION

Slip plane

What is the difference between the twinning and dislocation-movement
mechanisms of plastic deformation?

Grain B
Grain A

• Figure 9-12 This illustration shows the spatial lattices of two adjacent
grains. Notice that the lattices are not aligned. There is a dislocation moving toward the grain boundary in grain A. Because of misalignment, the
dislocation in grain A cannot move into grain B and is trapped at the grain
boundary. In essence, the grain boundary is an obstacle to dislocation
movement. Therefore the greater the number of grain boundaries, the
higher is the yield strength of the material.

Plastic Deformation Without Dislocation
Movement
An alternative mode of permanent deformation in metals is twinning. Twinning refers to the atomic arrangement within a crystal
where a region takes on a special orientation from the adjacent
crystal; the two different orientations are crystallographically identical, as if they are reflections across a mirror plane. This boundary
between the original and the new orientation is called a twinning
plane (Figure 9-14, A). The portion having a lattice orientation

192

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

Original
annealed metal
thickness
0.110"
No. 9 B.
& S. GA.

Cold rolled to thickness
0.100"
No. 10 B.
& S. GA.

0.090"
No. 11 B.
& S. GA.

0.080"
No. 12 B.
& S. GA.

0.070"
No. 13 B.
& S. GA.

0.060"
No. 14 B.
& S. GA.

Annealed for
30 minutes
at 350 C.

Annealed for
30 minutes
at 500 C.

Annealed for
30 minutes
at 650 C.

Annealed for
30 minutes
at 750 C.

Annealed for
30 minutes
at 800 C.

• Figure 9-13 Grain size and appearance of brass (copper 66%, zinc 34%) after cold working and annealing. Note that as the degree of cold working increases (to the right in the figure), the grains become more
distorted. When the recrystallization proceeds, the grain size is inversely proportional to the degree of cold
working (×40). (Prepared by L. H. DeWald.)

that is different from the original orientation is called a twin.
Twinning can occur in a metal either during solidification, as
shown in Figure 9-14, A, or as a result of being stressed to a state
of permanent deformation (Figure 9-14, B).
The stress needed to twin a crystal tends to be higher than
that required for slip (Figure 9-6). Therefore slip is the normal
permanent deformation mechanism. Twinning is the favored
mechanism at high strain rates and at low temperatures, rather
than dislocation movement, in metals having relatively few
slip systems. One should note that permanent deformation by
twinning is merely a reorientation of the lattice, and although
the atoms in the twinned portion have moved, their positions
relative to each other remain unchanged. On the other hand,
permanent deformation by slip occurs along individual lattice
planes for which the positions of atoms relative to each other
have changed.
Twinning has significance for the permanent deformation of
α-titanium alloys, which are highly important for some dental

implants and are gaining interest for cast restorations. In the
unit cell for α-titanium, the ratio of the lattice parameter (c)
in the perpendicular direction to the basal plane and the lattice parameter (a) in the basal plane (see Figure 2-9, G), which
is known as the c/a ratio, is slightly less than the ideal value of
1.633 for the hexagonal close-packed (HCP) structure, which
results in additional slip planes and the tendency to undergo
twinning readily. Twinning is also the mechanism for reversible
transformation between the austenitic and martensitic structures
in nickel-titanium orthodontic wires, which has considerable
clinical significance.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why must recrystallization of orthodontic wires be avoided when a stressrelief heat treatment is performed after manipulation to minimize fracture
during placement?

CHAPTER 9

Original atom position

Metals

193

Atom position after twinning

Twinning
planes

A

Twinning
planes

B
• Figure 9-14 Schematic illustration of twinning in a metal. A, Atomic arrangement at the twinning planes
in a face-centered cubic metal. The dashed lines show the orientation of the crystal if twinning had not occurred. Note that the atoms on either side of the two twinning planes have a mirror relationship. B, A lattice
structure before and after plastic deformation of a metal by twinning under tension. Note that the shape
of the object has changed, but the relative position of the atoms remains unchanged. Also note that the
atoms on either side of the twinning plane have a mirror relationship. The two colors of spheres provide a
contrast of neighboring atoms.

Effects of Annealing Wrought Alloys
The effects associated with permanent deformation (e.g., strain
hardening, decreased ductility, distorted grains, and increased
dislocation density) can be reversed by simply heating the metal
to an appropriate elevated temperature without melting it. This
process is called annealing, and it takes place in three successive
stages: recovery, recrystallization, and grain growth. The more
severe the degree of cold working, the more rapidly the effects can
be reversed by annealing. Also, the higher the melting point of the
metal, the higher is the temperature needed for annealing.

Recovery
Heating increases atom diffusion and the initiation of annealing. As
Figure 9-15 shows, there is a very slight decrease in tensile strength
and no change in ductility during the recovery stage, which reduces
the number of dislocations and relieves the internal strain energy
resulting from cold working. Orthodontic appliances fabricated by
bending wires are often subjected to a stress-relief anneal prior to
their placement. This heat treatment stabilizes the configuration
of the appliance and allows an accurate determination of the force
that the appliance can deliver in the mouth. The elimination of
residual stresses in the appliance also reduces the likelihood of fracture during clinical adjustments. It is essential that this heat treatment be performed in the recovery-temperature range and not at
higher temperatures where recrystallization occurs.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does the process of recrystallization cause a significant reduction in the
tensile strength of the alloy?

Recrystallization
The recrystallization process involves a radical change in the microstructure, as seen in the second and third rows of Figure 9-13.
The atoms at this stage are rearranged into a lower-energy

configuration. The old, distorted grains disappear as new strainfree grains emerge. After completion of recrystallization, the
alloy retains microstructures resembling that before cold working
(upper-left corner of Figure 9-13) and essentially attains its original soft, ductile condition (Figure 9-15). That is the reason why
recrystallization must be avoided during the stress-relief heat treatment of orthodontic appliances. If a metal is not sufficiently coldworked, recrystallization may not occur during a typical annealing
process.
The average grain size of the recrystallized structure depends
on the degree of cold working; the greater is the number of such
nuclei. The greater the degree of cold working, the smaller is the
grain size after recrystallization.

Grain Growth
The grain size increases when the cold-worked alloy is annealed
at an elevated temperature (Figure 9-13, row 4 to row 6). This
increase in grain size is called grain growth, which is a process by
which the volume of the grain boundary is reduced; large grains
grow at the expense of small grains. Grain growth does not proceed indefinitely to yield a single crystal; rather, it ceases after a
relatively coarse grain structure has been produced.

Types of Wrought Alloys
Wrought alloys are used as wires by orthodontists for correcting
displacements of teeth from proper occlusion and by prosthodontists and general dentists as clasps for the retention and stabilization of RPDs. Wrought alloys are also made in the form of files
and reamers for endodontists to clean and shape root canals or as
prefabricated metal crowns for pedodontic patients.
Orthodontic wires are formed into various configurations or
appliances to apply forces to move the teeth to a more desirable
alignment. From the orthodontic viewpoint, as demonstrated by
the loading of a cantilever beam (Figure 9-16), the proportional
limit (or yield strength) reflects the maximal amount of force a
particular beam design can deliver. The elastic deflection (δ) of

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

Tensile strength

Cold working

Recovery

Recrystallization

Grain growth

Tensile st
ren

gth

Ductility

194

Ductility

% cold work

Time of annealing

• Figure 9-15 Tensile strength and ductility of a metal as a function of the percentage of cold working
and annealing time. Tensile strength increases during cold working, and ductility decreases. These properties change only slightly during recovery. During recrystallization, tensile strength decreases, and ductility
increases rapidly. Only slight changes occur during grain growth. (Adapted from Richman MH: Introduction
to the Science of Metals, Waltham, MA, 1967, Blaisdell.)

metals selected (i.e., elastic modulus and proportional limit) and
the dimensions of the beam (i.e., thickness, width, radius, and
length). Thus, finding the optimal design for an appliance that
will deliver the low, constant forces, which are biologically desirable for tooth movement, is possible. Practically, the working
range of a material is considered to be the elastic strain at the yield
strength (YS) of the wire, which is termed springback and defined
as YS/E. The mechanical principles described here also apply to
the design of retentive clasps and root canal files and reamers.
Wrought alloys used in dentistry, which include stainless steel,
cobalt-chromium-nickel, nickel-titanium, and beta-titanium, are
now discussed.

Z
O

W

IRUDUHFWDQJXODUFURVVVHFWLRQ
IRUDFLUFXODUFURVVVHFWLRQ
UUDGLXV

3

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the differences in the martensitic structures that form in plain
carbon steels and austenitic stainless steels?

• Figure 9-16 Bending of a cantilever beam. δ, Deflection; t, thickness; w,
width; l, length; and E, elastic modulus.

a cantilever beam under a load reflects the extent of tooth displacement that the designed appliance can deliver. The maximum
elastic deflection is reached when the stress approaches the proportional limit and is called the working range of the beam. An
obvious benefit of wrought wires is that they have a greater working range than their cast counterparts.
Physiologically, excessive forces acting on the tooth may cause
root resorption, and insufficient forces yield no tooth movement.
A properly designed orthodontic appliance applies appropriate
amounts of force to the teeth. As the teeth move, the deflection of
the device decreases. In response to the reduction in elastic deflection of the appliance, the level of force applied to the teeth is gradually reduced below the threshold level. When this happens, the
appliance must be reactivated to increase the force level to its original value. Reactivation requires partial permanent deformation to
obtain a suitable configuration for moving the teeth effectively.
The relationships for rectangular and round wires in Figure 9-16
show that the elastic deflection (δ) depends on the properties of

Stainless Steel Alloys
The metallurgy and terminology of stainless steels are closely
related to the binary iron-carbon system, which yields the primary
phases of carbon steel. Therefore a brief outline of the carbon
steels is presented here.

Carbon Steel
Carbon steels can be described simply as iron-carbon binary alloys
that contain less than about 2.1% of carbon by weight. At room
temperature, pure iron has a bcc structure that transforms into
an FCC structure at 912 °C. The solubility of carbon in BCC
iron reaches a maximum of 0.02%, and this material is known
as ferrite. The solid solution of carbon in FCC iron is called austenite, which has a maximal solubility of about 2.1% carbon. All
carbon-steel compositions have the austenite structure at elevated
temperatures.
When a plain carbon steel (only iron and carbon) containing
0.8% carbon is cooled slowly in the austenitic phase to 723 °C,
a solid-state eutectoid transformation occurs to yield a microstructural constituent called pearlite, which consists of alternating

CHAPTER 9

fine-scale lamellae of ferrite and iron carbide (Fe3C). The Fe3C
phase is much harder and more rigid than austenite or ferrite.
At temperatures below 723 °C, when the carbon content is less
than 0.8%, the carbon-steel microstructure consists of ferrite and
pearlite, whereas plain carbon steels containing more than 0.8%
carbon are much harder alloys, with microstructures consisting of
iron carbide and pearlite.
If austenite is cooled very rapidly (quenched), spontaneous
transformation from the FCC structure to a body-centered tetragonal (BCT) structure results in a new phase called martensite,
which is very hard, strong, and brittle. The transformation occurs
by small atomic displacements and does not involve elemental diffusion. The high hardness of martensite allows the grinding of
a sharp edge, which is retained in extended use. Martensite is a
metastable phase that transforms to ferrite and iron carbide when
it is heated to elevated temperatures. This process is called tempering; it reduces the hardness of the alloy but increases its toughness.

Types of Stainless Steels
When approximately 12% to 30% chromium by weight is added
to carbon steel, the alloy is commonly known as stainless steel.
The chromium in base-metal alloys forms a very thin, transparent, adherent layer of Cr2O3, termed a passivating oxide, which
prevents corrosion of the underlying alloy. If the oxide layer is
ruptured by mechanical or chemical means, the passivating oxide
layer eventually forms again in an oxidizing environment, such as
ambient air.
Based on the previously described crystal structures formed by
iron and carbon atoms, there are three major types of stainless steels:
Ferritic Stainless Steels. These alloys provide good corrosion
resistance at a low cost. They cannot be hardened by heat treatment or readily work-hardened. Consequently, they have little
application in dentistry.
Martensitic Stainless Steels. These alloys can be heat-treated
in the same manner as plain carbon steels, which results in a
high yield strength and hardness for use in surgical and cutting
instruments.
Austenitic Stainless Steels. The addition of nickel stabilizes the
austenite phase on cooling of the alloy. The austenitic stainless
steels are the most corrosion resistant of the three major types.
Austenitic stainless steel is preferred for dental applications
because it has the following properties: (1) greater ductility for
more cold working without fracturing, (2) greater strength from
cold work, (3) greater ease of welding, (4) ability to overcome
sensitization, (5) less critical grain growth, and (6) comparative
ease of reshaping.
The foregoing three classifications of stainless steels, with
approximate compositions, are presented in Table 9-15.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
How does austenitic stainless steel acquire its corrosion resistance? Can this
protection be lost during the fabrication and normal use of a stainless-steel
appliance?

Corrosion Resistance of Austenitic Stainless Steel
Stainless steel can corrode under the conditions described in
Chapter 3, Stress Corrosion. For example, severe strain hardening produces highly stressed regions that are anodic to less

Metals

195

TABLE 9-15 Compositions (Weight Percent) of

Three Types of Stainless Steel* Based on
Crystal Structure of Iron Atoms
Type of Stainless Steel

Chromium

Nickel

Carbon

Ferritic (BCC)

11.5–27.0

0

0.20 max.

Austenitic (FCC)

16.0–26.0

7.0–22.0

0.25 max.

Martensitic (BCT)

11.5–17.0

0–2.5

0.15–1.20

BCC, Body-centered cubic; BCT, body-centered tetragonal; FCC, face-centered cubic.
*
Silicon, phosphorus, sulfur, manganese, tantalum, and niobium may also be present in
small amounts. The balance is iron.

stressed regions in the presence of saliva. Organic or inorganic
deposits and any site of surface roughness on a metal may result
in localized concentration cell corrosion. Therefore a stainless-steel orthodontic appliance should be polished so that it
remains clean and less susceptible to tarnish or corrosion during use. When a stainless-steel wire or a stainless-steel appliance is abraded or cut with a carbon steel bur or similar steel
tool, carbon steel debris from these tools becomes embedded in
the stainless-steel surface, causing dissimilar metal corrosion in
vivo. Chlorine-containing cleansers should not be used to clean
removable appliances fabricated from stainless steel.
When austenitic stainless steel is heated to between approximately 400 °C and 900 °C, chromium carbides precipitate along
the grain boundaries, causing chromium near the grain boundaries to be depleted below the concentrations necessary for corrosion protection, which also weakens the alloy. This phenomenon
is called sensitization; the stainless steel has become susceptible to
intergranular corrosion. The temperature range of sensitization is
within that used by the orthodontist for soldering and welding. In
addition, filler materials that are employed for brazed or soldered
joints in orthodontic appliances can also form galvanic couples
in vivo.
The manufacturer can reduce the carbon content of the
stainless steel to such an extent that carbide precipitation cannot occur or can severely cold work and heat the stainless steel
within the sensitization temperature range to spread the formation of chromium carbide precipitates within the bulk grains
instead of only at the grain boundaries. Elements such as titanium and tantalum, which preferentially form carbides, can be
added to the stainless steel to preserve the level of chromium
when the metal is exposed to elevated temperatures. This process
is called stabilization.

Mechanical Properties of Austenitic Stainless Steel
The approximate values of the mechanical properties of a representative stainless-steel orthodontic wire are listed in Table 9-16.
Strength and hardness may increase with a decrease in cross-sectional dimensions because of the increased cold working that is
required for forming smaller wires.
It is unfortunate that a stainless-steel orthodontic wire can
become fully annealed (recrystallized) after a few seconds at temperatures from 700 °C to 800 °C because soldering and welding
of stainless-steel wires are carried out in that temperature range.
The yield strength of the wire and, thus, the working range
necessary for a satisfactory orthodontic appliance are greatly
reduced after such annealing. However, using low-fusing solders

196

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

TABLE 9-16 Representative Mechanical Properties

for Major Orthodontic Wire Types
Elastic
Modulus (GPa)

Yield
Strength (GPa)

Tensile
Strength (GPa)

Stainless steel

179

1.6

2.1

Co-Cr-Ni

184

1.4

1.7

Ni-Ti

41

0.43

1.5

β-Ti

72

0.93

1.3

Alloy

soldering is to use as little heat for as short a time as possible.
Other heating techniques include the use of a hydrogen-oxygen
torch, electric resistance heating, and indirect heating using a
brass wire intermediary.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Does welding of stainless-steel wires subject them to undesired annealing?
What can be done to reduce the effect of annealing?

Welding

CRITICAL QUESTION

Flat structures such as bands and brackets are usually joined by
spot welding, which produces a large electrical current that is
forced by the electrode to flow through a limited area (spot) on
the overlapped materials that are to be welded. The interfacial
resistance of the materials to the current flow produces intense
localized heating and fusion of the overlapped metals. No solder is
employed. Ideally, melting is confined to the junction area, and a
cast-type structure is formed. The grain structure of the surrounding wrought alloy should not be affected, but stress exists at the
interface of the cast and wrought structures, which would be the
most likely path of joint failure should fracture occur. The strength
of the welded joint decreases with an increase in the area of recrystallization of the adjacent wrought structure, and the joint strength
increases with the area of the weld. The welded joint is susceptible
to corrosion, primarily because of the loss of passivation caused by
sensitization and the localized stress at the interface between the
weld area and the surrounding wrought structure.

Which failure processes in soldered and welded joints in stainless-steel
orthodontic appliances might be observed clinically?

Cobalt-Chromium-Nickel Alloys

and minimizing the soldering and welding times can minimize
the softening. Any softening that occurs under such conditions
can be remedied considerably by contouring and polishing of
the soldered areas.
An increase in the elastic properties of a stainless-steel wire
can be obtained by heating it to temperatures between 400 °C
and 500 °C for 5 to 120 seconds after cold working. This
stress-relief heat treatment promotes the recovery annealing
stage, which removes the residual stresses introduced during
manipulation of the wire. Thus it stabilizes the shape of the
appliance. This is important clinically because such residual
stresses can promote fracture when the appliance is being
adjusted by the clinician.

Soldering and Welding Stainless Steel
Stainless-steel components are often joined by silver solders.
Although such solders corrode in use because they are anodic to
stainless steel, this is not objectionable in orthodontic appliances.
These appliances are temporary structures, usually not worn in the
mouth for more than 6 to 30 months, and frequent inspection by
the orthodontist is necessary. As discussed earlier, a fluoride-containing flux is used to dissolve the passivating surface film formed
by chromium.
Technical Considerations for Soldering

The freehand soldering of stainless steel is not greatly different
from that of gold soldering, described earlier. A needlelike, nonluminous, gas-air flame may be used to minimize annealing of
the metal surrounding the joint. The reducing zone of the flame
should be used. The soldering should be observed in a shadow,
against a black background, so that the temperature can be judged
by the color of the workpiece. The color should never exceed a
dull red.
Prior to soldering, the parts should be tack-welded for alignment during the soldering procedure. Then flux should be
applied, and the heavier-gauge part should be heated first. Flux
must cover all of the areas to be soldered before heat is applied. As
soon as the flux fuses, the solder alloy should be added, and heating is then continued until the solder flows around and within
the joint. After the solder has flowed, the work should be immediately removed from the heat source and quenched in water.
From the preceding discussion on the sensitization of austenitic
stainless steels, it should be evident that the objective during

Cobalt-chromium-nickel alloys were originally developed for use
as watch springs (Elgiloy) and first marketed for use in orthodontic appliances during the 1950s. Elgiloy has excellent resistance
to tarnish and corrosion in the oral environment, and it uses the
same welding and soldering procedures used for stainless-steel
wires.
The manufacturer offers Elgiloy wires in four different tempers:
soft, ductile, semiresilient, and resilient. The most widely used is
the soft temper (Blue Elgiloy), which is easily manipulated and
then heat-treated to achieve increased resilience; other tempers
are also responsive to heat treatment. The resulting changes in
mechanical properties are associated with precipitation reactions.
Clinicians can easily perform heat treatment using an electrical
resistance welding apparatus and a special paste provided by the
manufacturer to indicate the optimal period of time.
Because of their nearly identical values of elastic modulus
(Table 9-16), the orthodontic force delivery for Blue Elgiloy and
stainless-steel orthodontic wires is essentially the same. Heat treatment of Blue Elgiloy orthodontic wires was found to increase the
elastic modulus in tension from a range of 160 to 190 GPa for
as-received wires to a range of 180 to 210 GPa, along with the
springback (YS/E) increase from a range of 0.0045 to 0.0065 to a
range of 0.0054 to 0.0074. Co-Cr-Ni wire products are also available from other manufacturers, but minimal mechanical property
data have been reported in the literature.

Nickel-Titanium Alloys
A wrought nickel-titanium orthodontic wire alloy known as
Nitinol (now Nitinol Classic) was introduced commercially during the 1970s. This wire alloy is noted for its much lower elastic

CHAPTER 9

Mechanical Properties
The approximate mechanical properties of Nitinol wire are shown
in Table 9-16. The placement of permanent bends by the clinician
in Nitinol wires is difficult because of their high resilience. Nitinol has high ductility, and its ability to undergo substantial work
hardening is evident from the considerably higher tensile strength
relative to the yield strength. The very low elastic modulus of Nitinol results in very low forces delivered by the appliance compared
with similarly constructed and activated appliances from stainless
steel and Co-Cr-Ni alloys, and the springback or elastic range
available for tooth movement is much greater for Nitinol compared with these two alloys.

d

c

Bending moment

modulus (Table 9-16) and much wider elastic working range compared with the stainless-steel and Co-Cr-Ni wires. The alloy name
Nitinol originally came from the two elements, nickel (Ni) and
titanium (Ti), and the Naval Ordnance Laboratory (NOL) where
these alloys were developed.
The nickel-titanium alloys used in dentistry are based on the
equiatomic intermetallic compound NiTi, which contains 55%
nickel and 45% titanium by weight. Orthodontic wire alloys contain small amounts of other elements, such as copper and chromium. The microstructure consists predominantly of NiTi, but
other very small precipitates having different compositions are also
observed. The austenitic NiTi phase has a complex BCC structure,
and the martensitic NiTi phase has been reported to possess a distorted monoclinic, triclinic, or hexagonal structure. The names
austenitic and martensitic for these different crystallographic forms
of NiTi have been taken from the metallurgical terminology for
carbon steel and stainless steel.

197

Metals

b
e

f

a
g

Angular deflection
• Figure 9-17 Schematic bending movement versus angular deflection
curve for a nickel-titanium orthodontic wire showing the regions of superelasticity: b-c during loading (activation) and e-f during unloading (deactivation). Such behavior imparts a large working range to the arch wire.
Region c-d corresponds to permanent deformation during loading, and de corresponds to initial unloading of the permanently deformed arch wire.
Regions b-c and e-f correspond to the forward and reverse directions,
respectively, of the stress-induced transformation between the low-stress
austenitic and high-stress martensitic structures. The final stage of unloading occurs along region f-g.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the clinical advantages of a shape-memory nickel-titanium
orthodontic wire compared with a stainless-steel orthodontic wire?

Superelasticity and Shape Memory in Nickel-Titanium
Orthodontic Wires
Transformation between the austenitic and martensitic forms of
Nitinol alloys can be induced by both temperature and stress.
Austenitic NiTi is the high-temperature, low-stress form, and
martensitic NiTi is the low-temperature, high-stress form. Transformation between these phases occurs by a twinning process,
which is reversible below the elastic limit and also results in
changes in volume and electrical resistivity.
Figure 9-17 presents a highly schematic illustration of the
stress-strain behavior for a certain type of NiTi wire in bending;
the bending moment and the angular deflection are equivalent
to the stress-versus-strain relationship tested in tension. Segment
a-b corresponds to the initial elastic deformation of the wire,
followed by segment b-c, where the austenitic structure transforms to the martensitic structure. After the transformation is
completed at point c (typically at approximately 10% strain),
further elastic deformation and plastic deformation occur with
increasing bending moment along segment c-d. During unloading, this sequence of events is reversed, with segment d-e corresponding to loss of elastic strain (angular deflection) in the
martensitic structure, followed by transformation back to the
austenitic structure along segment e-f, and finally, loss of elastic
strain in the austenitic structure along segment f-g, as the bending moment decreases to zero. A small amount of permanent
angular deflection remains in the wire because of the permanent

deformation induced in segment c-d. This behavior in segments
b-c and e-f is called superelasticity or pseudoelasticity in engineering materials science. Segment e-f delivers a nearly constant force
for tooth movement during deactivation (unloading), which
does not occur with stainless-steel or Co-Cr-Ni wires. When the
superelastic wire is tested in tension, for which the stress and
strain are uniform over the cross section, segments b-c and e-f
are both horizontal (corresponding, respectively, to the stressassisted transformation from austenite to martensite on loading
and the reverse transformation on unloading). These two regions
are referred to as the upper superelastic plateau and the lower superelastic plateau, respectively. There has been some question about
whether the superelastic NiTi wires are activated sufficiently into
the superelastic region under clinical conditions to take advantage of this property.
Tooth movement can also be achieved by another property
of some NiTi wires. The shape of the appliance, such as an orthodontic arch wire, is first established when the alloy is heated at
a temperature near 480 °C to stabilize the austenitic structure
(Figure 9-18). When the appliance is cooled to room temperature,
the alloy converts to the twinned martensitic phase and retains its
shape. The appliance is then reshaped at room temperature by the
clinician; the deformed martensitic structure is altered because
of the stress induced by the deformation. When it is placed into
brackets bonded to malpositioned teeth, exposure of the wire to
body temperature will promote the deformed martensitic structure to revert back to the austenitic structure, and the appliance
regains its shape established near 480 °C, which allows for further
tooth movement. This phenomenon is called shape memory, which

198

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

Cooling

Deformation
Twinned martensite

Heating

Austenite

Deformed martensite

• Figure 9-18 Shape-memory process. The austenite crystal is stable at a higher temperature and can
be plastically deformed to some desired shape without altering its crystalline structure. When austenite is
cooled to room temperature, it converts to a twinned martensite without undergoing a shape change. When
the twinned martensite is deformed plastically under a stress, the structure detwins and takes up a new
shape. Note that the overall shape of the object has changed, but the relative position between atoms did
not change. Upon heating to body temperature (for orthodontic wire), the deformed martensite (detwinned
martensite) will revert back to austenite and regain its original shape because there is no change in the relative
position of the atom arrangement. Heating of twinned martensite will also recover the austenite structure.

is possessed at body temperature by some commercial NiTi wire
products.
The temperature at which transformation from the martensitic structure to austenitic structure is completed is called the Af
(austenite-finish) temperature. This transformation temperature
can be varied by elemental additions, such as copper and chromium, which are used for the commercial copper Ni-Ti wires
to achieve different activation temperatures (27, 35, and 40 °C)
in the oral environment. The Af temperature is a clinically relevant property of an NiTi orthodontic wire, and its measurement
by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) is included in ISO
Standard 15841 (ADA Specification No. 32) on wires for use in
orthodontics.
These standards subdivide orthodontic wires into type 1 and
type 2, which display linear elastic and nonlinear elastic behavior, respectively, during unloading from 50 °C. Stainless steel,
cobalt-chromium-nickel, and β-titanium wires are type 1; nickeltitanium wires are type 2. Mechanical properties can be measured
using the tension test or the three-point bending test, where the
bending force during unloading is measured at 3-, 2-, 1-, and 0.5mm deflections. Whereas type 1 wires can be tested at room temperature, type 2 wires are to be tested at 36 ± 1 °C.
As noted previously, nickel-titanium orthodontic wires are difficult to reconfigure into clinical shapes, and they must be joined
by mechanical crimps because the alloy can be neither soldered

nor welded. In addition, nickel-titanium orthodontic wires have
relatively rough surfaces, which result in high friction between
arch wires and brackets; this can potentially prolong the time
needed for clinical treatment.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the differences in the three general types of nickel-titanium
orthodontic wires? Why is the superelasticity property of some NiTi alloys
advantageous for endodontic applications?

Nickel-Titanium Endodontic Instruments
The outstanding property of the nickel-titanium alloy that
resulted in its widespread use for endodontics is its much lower
elastic modulus compared with the austenitic stainless steel that
was formerly used for hand instruments. This allows the rotating
NiTi file, used with an electric motor and reduction contra-angle
handpiece, to negotiate curved root canals with facility. Although
the pioneering article by Walia et al. investigated hand files fabricated from nonsuperelastic NiTi wire, subsequent NiTi alloys for
rotary instruments were designed by manufacturers to have superelastic character with transformable austenite. The superelastic
property enables the instrument to adapt along a sharply curving
root canal during instrumentation, and the small increase in stress

CHAPTER 9

developed at the canal wall minimizes the risk for perforation of
the canal. DSC studies have shown that the enthalpy change (ΔH)
for transformation between martensite to austenite in rotary NiTi
instruments is less than that for superelastic orthodontic wires,
indicating that transformable austenite comprises a smaller proportion of the NiTi microstructure.
The drawback of the NiTi alloy is that nickel-titanium rotary
endodontic instruments have generally been fabricated by
machining the starting wire blanks, in contrast to stainless-steel
endodontic instruments, for which a special apparatus twists the
tapered starting wire blank. However, rotary instruments have
recently been introduced in which the NiTi wire blank is twisted
(microstructure in the intermediate R-phase condition), rather
than being machined. The machining process results in substantial permanent deformation (Figure 9-19) at the edges of the cutting flutes and surface flaws that can lead to premature fracture of
the instrument. It is likely that the NiTi alloy is inherently notch
sensitive because the coexisting austenitic and martensitic NiTi
phases have very different crystal structures.
Recently, new NiTi alloys, beginning with M-wire, have
been introduced to endodontics, for which special manufacturer
thermomechanical processing yields a largely martensitic microstructure. Rotary instruments fabricated by special proprietary
protocols from these new alloys have improved fatigue resistance
and have become widely used in practice. The novel products
from one manufacturer are described as having the property of
controlled memory.

Metals

199

molybdenum stabilizes the BCC β-titanium structure at room
temperature and yields an alloy of lower elastic modulus and
higher ductility than those of the HCP α-titanium alloys. This
means that β-titanium can easily be drawn into wires for orthodontic applications, but careful manufacturing attention to the
drawing conditions is essential. Among all β-titanium orthodontic wires available, the original commercial alloy had the trade
name of titanium-molybdenum alloy (TMA). This orthodontic
alloy composition is very close to that of the engineering Beta
III titanium alloy.

Mechanical Properties of Beta-Titanium Wires
The elastic modulus of β-titanium wires is intermediate between
that for stainless-steel and Elgiloy wires and that for Nitinol wires
(Table 9-16). The springback (YS/E) for β-titanium wires is much
greater than that for the stainless-steel and Elgiloy wires and very
similar to that for the Nitinol wires. The β-titanium wires can be
highly cold-worked, and because of the BCC structure of the β
phase, the wires have high formability, which is comparable to
that of austenitic stainless steel, and can be readily bent into various orthodontic configurations.
Because of the high reactivity of titanium, careful control of
the original cast ingot quality, the atmosphere, and other processing parameters during wire drawing is essential. (This is also
true for manufacturing of the nickel-titanium orthodontic wires.)
Whereas heat treatments can be performed to alter the mechanical
properties of β-titanium wires, these wires should not be heattreated by the clinician.

The first commercial β-titanium orthodontic wires had an
approximate composition (by weight) of 79% titanium, 11%
molybdenum, 6% zirconium, and 4% tin. The addition of

Welding
Titanium alloys are highly reactive with oxygen at high temperature. Because of their high melting temperatures and this reactivity, soldering of these alloys with torches is not advisable. To
prevent the potential reaction of titanium alloys with the oxygen
in ambient air during the metal-joining process, these procedures
are often performed in a vacuum or an argon environment. The
β-titanium wires are the only orthodontic wire alloy type that
demonstrates true weldability, and clinically satisfactory joints
can be made by electrical resistance welding. Such joints need not

• Figure 9-19 Photomicrograph of a nickel-titanium rotary endodontic in-

• Figure 9-20 Photomicrograph of a weld joint between two 0.43-by

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is a potential clinical disadvantage of an orthodontic wire fabricated
from β-titanium?

Beta-Titanium Alloys

strument, showing permanent deformation at the edges of the flutes (rollover) and other surface defects that resulted from the machining process
used for fabrication. (Courtesy S. B. Alapati.)

0.63-mm β-titanium orthodontic wires showing minimum distortion of the
original cold-worked microstructure. (Courtesy T. C. Labenski and A. J.
Goldberg.)

200

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

TABLE 9-17

Physical Properties of Noble-Metal Wires

Wire Type

Yield Strength Oven-Cooled
(MPa)

Tensile Strength Oven-Cooled
(MPa)

Quenched

Oven-Cooled

Fusion Temperature (°C)

Formerly ANSI/ADA Type I

860

930

15

4

960

Formerly ANSI/ADA Type II

690

860

15

2

870

ELONGATION (%)

MINIMUM ELONGATION (%)
Wire Type

Proportional Limit (MPa)

Quenched

Oven-Cooled

Fusion Temperature (°C)

Platinum-gold-palladium

*

550–1030

860–1240

*

14–15

—

1500–1530

Palladium-silver-copper

†

†

16–24

8–15

1040–1080

690–790

Tensile Strength (MPa)

960–1070

ADA, American Dental Association; ANSI, American National Standards Institute.
*

Quenched (alloy does not age-harden).

†

Age-hardened.

Data from Dentists Desk Reference: Materials, Instruments and Equipment. Metals and Alloys: Precious Metal Wrought Wire, Chicago, IL, 1981, American Dental Association; Lyman T: Metals Handbook:
Properties and Selection of Metals, ed 8, Vol 1, Metals Park, OH, 1964, American Society for Metals.

be reinforced with solder, which is necessary for welded joints in
stainless-steel and Elgiloy wires. A weld made with insufficient
heat will fail at the interface between the wires, whereas overheating may cause a failure adjacent to the joint. Figure 9-20 is a cross
section of a properly welded β-titanium joint, showing minimum
distortion of the original cold-worked structure.

Corrosion Resistance
Because of a passive TiO2 surface film, which is analogous to the
Cr2O3 film on stainless-steel and Elgiloy wires, titanium and its
alloys generally have excellent corrosion resistance and environmental stability. There has been some concern about the biocompatibility of orthodontic wires containing nickel, which may cause
localized tissue irritation or an allergic reaction in some patients,
and it should be noted that β-titanium is the only major orthodontic wire alloy that is nickel-free.
Surface Property
The surface roughness of the β-titanium wires is much greater
than that of the stainless-steel and Elgiloy wires. Scanning electron microscopy observations suggest that the surface roughness
originates from adherence of the titanium in the β-titanium alloys
to the dies or rollers used in the wire-manufacturing process. Special proprietary lubricants must be used by the manufacturers to
alleviate this problem. During orthodontic treatment, the rough
arch-wire surfaces increase sliding friction, and localized cold
welding of the arch-wire alloy to the metal bracket has also been
hypothesized.
Surface treatment of nickel-titanium and β-titanium orthodontic wires with nitrogen ion implantation has been performed
to decrease adhesion between wires and brackets. One study
reported significant differences for in vitro tooth movement with
ion-implanted TMA and nickel-titanium wires, compared with
their non–ion-implanted counterparts. However, the results of
a recent clinical study suggest that there were no significant differences for the rate of space closure when ion-implanted TMA,
conventional TMA (not ion-implanted), and stainless-steel wires
were used.

Additional Wrought Alloys
Noble-metal wires are still occasionally employed in the construction of RPD clasps and orthodontic appliances and in retention
pins for restorations and endodontic posts. The elastic modulus
of these gold alloy wires is approximately 100 to 120 GPa, which
is higher than that for titanium-based wrought alloys but considerably lower than those of stainless steel and Co-Cr-Ni wrought
alloys. Table 9-17 shows the compositions of two types of noblemetal wrought wires and the mechanical properties of two products: platinum-gold-palladium (P-G-P), which contains 40% to
50% platinum, 25% to 30% gold, and 25% to 30% palladium
by weight, and palladium-silver-copper (P-S-C), which consists of
42% to 44% palladium, 38% to 41% silver, 16% to 17% copper,
and 0% to 1% platinum by weight. The high fusion temperature
(hence high recrystallization temperature) of P-G-P wire would
be especially useful for casting an RPD framework to this alloy.
It is the high fusion temperatures of platinum and palladium that
raise the fusion temperature of P-G-P wire. P-S-C wires have also
been considered useful for dental applications because their fusion
temperatures are higher than those of the gold-based alloy wires.
Wrought cobalt-chromium alloys for RPD clasps are also
available. For example, a cobalt-chromium-tungsten-nickel wire
(Ticonium) has a yield strength of approximately 920 MPa, a
tensile strength of nearly 1400 MPa, and a percent elongation
of 19%. This wrought alloy is not heat-treatable and is designed
for use with the lower-fusing nickel-chromium-beryllium casting
alloy from the same manufacturer.

Acknowledgments
The author wishes to acknowledge Dr. Paul Cascone, Dr. Kenneth
Anusavice, and Dr. A. Jon Goldberg for their previous contributions to this chapter. The author also wants to thank Dr. Danna
Mota Morena, Faculty of Dentistry, University Center Christus
(Unichristus), Fortaleza, Brazil, for reviewing and providing valuable information for this chapter.

CHAPTER 9

Selected Readings
Akova T, Ucar Y, Tukay A, et al: Comparison of the bond strength of
laser-sintered and cast base metal dental alloys to porcelain, Dent
Mater, 24:1400–1404, 2008.
The bond strength to porcelain was not significantly different for cast
Ni-Cr, cast Co-Cr, and laser-sintered Co-Cr alloys. Compositions of
the Co-Cr alloys for casting and laser sintering are compared.
Alapati SB, Brantley WA, Iijima M, et al: Metallurgical characterization
of a new nickel-titanium wire for rotary endodontic instruments,
J Endod, 35:1589–1593, 2009.
TEM, TMDSC, and Micro-XRD analyses of the M-wire for rotary
endodontic instruments.
Brantley W, Berzins D, Iijima M, et al: Structure/property relationships
in orthodontic alloys. In Eliades T, Brantley WA, editors: Orthodontic
Applications of Biomaterials: A Clinical Guide: 2017, Elsevier.
This chapter in a recently published book provides a comprehensive
account of current orthodontic alloys used for wires, brackets, and
other appliances. Another chapter discusses the use of nickel-titanium
products in orthodontic practice.
Brantley WA, Guo W, Clark WAT, et al: Microstructural studies of
35 °C copper Ni-Ti orthodontic wire and TEM confirmation of
low-temperature martensite transformation, Dent Mater, 24:204–
210, 2008.
TEM examination revealed that the very low-temperature transformation in NiTi wires is twinning in the martensite structure. Optical
microscope, SEM, and TEM images, along with important electron
diffraction patterns, were presented.
Bridgeport DA, Brantley WA, Herman PF: Cobalt-chromium and nickelchromium alloys for removable prosthodontics: Part 1. Mechanical
properties of as-cast alloys, J Prosthodon, 2:144–150, 1993.

Metals

201

This article presents more recent measurements of the mechanical
properties of removable partial denture alloys and contains relevant
SEM photographs of the fracture surfaces.
Gatto E, Matarese G, Di Bella G, et al: Load-deflection characteristics of
superelastic and thermal nickel-titanium wires, Eur J Orthod, 35:115–
123, 2013.
Three-point bending plots for seven NiTi wires tested in a manner
similar to the current ISO wire standard. Composition information is
provided for the different NiTi alloys.
Papazoglou E, Brantley WA, Johnston WM, et al: Effects of dental laboratory processing variables and in vitro testing medium on the porcelain adherence of high-palladium casting alloys, J Prosthet Dent,
79:514–519, 1998.
Setcos JC, Babaei-Mahani A, Silvio LD, et al: The safety of nickel containing dental alloys, Dent Mater, 22:1163–1168, 2006.
This paper reviews papers published after 1985 in regard to biological
reactions to nickel in dentistry. It is concluded that nickel-containing dental alloys do not pose a risk to patients or members of the dental team.
Shen Y, Zhou HM, Zheng YF, et al: Metallurgical characterization of
controlled memory wire nickel-titanium rotary instruments, J Endod,
37:1566–1571, 2011.
SEM examination, XRD analyses, and Vickers hardness measurements were performed for controlled-memory NiTi rotary instruments. The low risk for these instruments fracturing in the root canal
is noted.
Shoher I, Whiteman A: Captek—a new capillary casting technology for
ceramometal restorations, Quintessence Dent Technol, 18:9–20, 1995.
This paper describes the technology of the Captek system.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Akova T, Ucar Y, Tukay A, et al: Comparison of the bond strength of laser
sintered and cast base metal dental alloys to porcelain, Dent Mater,
24:1400–1404, 2008.
The bond strength to porcelain was not significantly different for cast
Ni-Cr, cast Co-Cr, and laser-sintered Co-Cr alloys. Compositions of
the Co-Cr alloys for casting and laser sintering are compared.
Al Jabbari YS, Barmpagadaki X, Psarris I, et al: Microstructural, mechanical, ionic release and tarnish resistance characterization of porcelain
fused to metal Co-Cr alloys manufactured via casting and three different CAD/CAM techniques, J Prosthodont Res, 63:150–156, 2019.
Co-Cr alloy specimens were prepared by conventional casting, milling,
selective laser melting, and milling soft metal. While nominal manufacturer compositions were different, no significant difference in composition was found for the tested specimens from the four alloy groups.
However, the manufacturing procedure significantly affected microstructure, porosity, and mechanical properties of the Co–Cr alloys.
American Dental Association: Classification system for cast alloys, J Am
Dent Assoc, 109:766, 1984.
The ADA established a system for classifying casting alloys as high
noble, noble, or predominantly base metal.
Anusavice KJ, Carroll JE: Effect of incompatibility stress on the fit of
metal-ceramic crowns, J Dent Res, 66:1341–1345, 1987.
The results of this study suggest that thermal incompatibility stress
resulting from a mismatch in thermal contraction coefficients may not
be a significant cause of metal distortion.
Brantley WA, Cai Z, Carr AB, et al: Metallurgical structures of as-cast and
heat-treated high-palladium dental alloys, Cells Mater, 3:103–114, 1993.
This study describes how the microstructures of these alloys develop
in terms of their compositions and the rapid solidification conditions
for dental casting.
Brantley WA, Cai Z, Papazoglou E, et al: X-ray diffraction studies of oxidized high-palladium alloys, Dent Mater, 12:333–341, 1996.
This study revealed the extremely complex structure of the internal
oxide layers on the high-palladium dental alloys and the profound
effect of surface preparation on the oxide phases found in these layers.
Brantley WA, Wu Q, Mitchell JC, et al: Heat-treatment behavior of highpalladium dental alloys, Cells Mater, 7:161–174, 1997.
A Pd-Cu-Ga alloy with much lower Vickers hardness is described, along
with the complex metallurgical behavior of several alloys during heat
treatments at temperatures within the range for porcelain firing cycles.
Bridgeport DA, Brantley WA, Herman PF: Cobalt-chromium and nickelchromium alloys for removable prosthodontics: Part 1. Mechanical
properties of as-cast alloys, J Prosthodon, 2:144–150, 1993.
This article presents more recent measurements of the mechanical
properties of removable partial denture alloys and contains relevant
SEM photographs of the fracture surfaces.
Cai Z, Bunce N, Nunn ME, et al: Porcelain adherence to dental cast CP titanium: Effects of surface modifications, Biomaterials, 22:979–986, 2001.
This article explains the need to perform surface modification of cast
CP titanium to improve porcelain adherence.
Davis JR, ed. Metals Handbook, Desk Edition, Metals Park, OH, 1992,
American Society for Metals.
An excellent reference book for metallurgical terms and the properties
of pure metals and alloys.
DeHoff PH, Anusavice KJ: Viscoelastic stress analysis of thermally
compatible and incompatible metal-ceramic systems, Dent Mater,
14:237–245, 1998.
A theoretical and experimental analysis of stress development in
ceramic veneers resulting from mismatches in the thermal expansion/
contraction coefficients between metals and ceramic veneers.
Eggbeer D, Bibb R, Williams R: The computer-aided design and rapid
prototyping fabrication of removable partial denture frameworks, Proc
Inst Mech Eng H, 219:195–202, 2005.
This work demonstrates that CAD/CAM techniques can be used
for electronic dental cast analysis, preparation, and design of RPD
frameworks.

Fairhurst CW, Anusavice KJ, Hashinger DT, et al: Thermal expansion of
dental alloys and porcelains, J Biomed Mat Res, 14:435–446, 1980.
Fasbinder DJ: Restorative material options for CAD/CAM restorations,
Compendium, 23:911, 2002.
Guo WH, Brantley WA, Clark WAT, et al: Transmission electron microscopic investigation of a Pd-Ag-In-Sn dental alloy, Biomaterials,
24:1705–1712, 2003.
Microstructural analysis shows the presence of a face-centered tetragonal (fct) precipitate.
Haag P: Porcelain veneering of titanium. Clinical and technical aspects,
Swed Dent J, 217(Suppl):17–75, 2011.
A review article on the processing, laboratory testing, and clinical
observation of veneered titanium prostheses.
Han HS, Yang HS, Lim HP, et al: Marginal accuracy and internal fit
of machine-milled and cast titanium crowns, J Prosthet Dent,
106(3):191–197, 2011.
This study shows castings-produced titanium crowns with a better
marginal fit than the CAD/CAM technique. The knife-edge margin
exhibited the greatest marginal discrepancy.
Li D, Brantley WA, Guo W, et al: Fatigue limits and SEM/TEM observations of fracture characteristics for three Pd-Ag dental casting alloys,
J Mater Sci Mater Med, 18:119–125, 2007.
This study illustrates the use of the staircase method to determine the
fatigue limit. Microstructures of the three Pd-Ag alloys obtained with
the SEM and TEM are shown.
Mackert JR Jr, Ringle RD, Fairhurst CW: High-temperature behavior of
a Pd-Ag alloy for porcelain, J Dent Res, 52:1229–1235, 1983.
The results of this study indicate that internal oxidation and the associated formation of nodules on the surface of a Pd-Ag alloy occur
rather than external oxidation in spite of the inclusion of oxidizable
elements in the alloy.
McLaren EA, Sorensen JA: High-strength alumina crowns and fixed partial dentures generated by copy-milling technology, Quintessence Dent
Technol, 18:31–38, 1995.
As an alternative to casting metal or sintering, hot-pressing or CAM of
ceramics, copy milling can be used as one of four alternative processing methods. This issue of Quint Dent Technol offers explanations of
copy milling, sintered foil, and electroforming methods.
Moffa JP, Guckes AD, Okawa MT, et al: An evaluation of nonprecious
alloys for use with porcelain veneers: Part II. Industrial safety and biocompatibility, J Prosthet Dent, 30:432–441, 1973.
This article provides quantitative information about the levels of
beryllium produced during the finishing and polishing of cast base
metal dental alloys.
Ohkubo C, Hanatani S, Hosoi T: Present status of titanium removable
dentures—a review of the literature, J Oral Rehabil, 35:706–714,
2008.
This review describes the laboratory conditions needed for fabricating
titanium frameworks and the status of titanium removable prostheses.
Okabe T, Ohkubo C, Watanabe I, et al: The present status of dental titanium casting, J Metals, 50:24–29, 1998.
This review article also provides important references for the historical
development of casting titanium for dental applications.
Örtorp A, Jönsson D, Mouhsen A, et al: The fit of cobalt-chromium
three-unit fixed dental prostheses fabricated with four different
techniques: A comparative in vitro study, Dent Mater, 27:356–363,
2011.
This study examined the effect of four fabrication methods, conventional lost-wax method, milled wax with lost-wax method, CAM milling, and direct laser metal sintering, on the fit of three-unit Co–Cr
FDPs as a function of the cement film thickness of the marginal and
internal gaps.
Papazoglou E, Brantley WA: Porcelain adherence vs force to failure for
palladium-gallium alloys: A critique of metal-ceramic bond testing,
Dent Mater, 14:112–119, 1998.
This article describes the use of two methods to evaluate the metalceramic bond. No correlation was found between these methods for a
series of Pd-Ga alloys bonded to the same porcelain.
201.e1

Papazoglou E, Brantley WA, Johnston WM: Evaluation of high-temperature distortion of high-palladium metal-ceramic crowns, J Prosthet
Dent, 85:133–140, 2001.
Experiments that simulated the steps in the preparation of single
metal-ceramic crowns suggest that these alloys pose no clinically significant problems with dimensional changes, provided that appropriate dental laboratory procedures are followed.
Papazoglou E, Brantley WA, Johnston WM, et al: Effects of dental laboratory processing variables and in vitro testing medium on the porcelain adherence of high-palladium casting alloys, J Prosthet Dent,
79:514–519, 1998.
Papazoglou E, Wu Q, Brantley WA, et al: Comparison of mechanical
properties for equiaxed fine-grained and dendritic high-palladium
alloys, J Mater Sci Mater Med, 11:601–608, 2000.
This article provides a detailed explanation of the laboratory measurement of mechanical properties and discusses how simulated porcelain
firing changes the properties of as-cast Pd-Cu-Ga and Pd-Ga alloys.
SEM observations of fracture surfaces and microstructures are presented, and the role of casting porosity is reported.
Rekow D, Thompson VP: Near-surface damage—a persistent problem in
crowns obtained by computer-aided design and manufacturing, Proc
Inst Mech Eng H, 219:233–243, 2005.
The article discusses factors that contribute to surface damage of
CAD/CAM fabrication of ceramic prostheses.
Setcos JC, Babaei-Mahani A, Silvio LD, et al: The safety of nickel containing dental alloys, Dent Mater, 22:1163–1168, 2006.
This paper reviews papers published after 1985 in regard to biological
reactions to nickel in dentistry. It is concluded that nickel-containing
dental alloys do not pose a risk to patients or members of the dental
team.
Shillingburg HT, Hobo S, Fisher DW: Preparation, design and margin
distortion in porcelain-fused-to-metal restorations, J Prosthet Dent,
29:276–284, 1973.
The results of this study suggested that thermal incompatibility stresses
were likely to cause margin distortion in metal-ceramic crowns. However, subsequent studies support other potential mechanisms, including the effect of excessive sandblasting time and/or pressure.
Shoher I, Whiteman A: Captek—a new capillary casting technology for
ceramometal restorations, Quintessence Dent Technol, 18:9–20, 1995.
This paper describes the technology of the Captek system.
Svanborg P, Hjalmarsson L: A systematic review on the accuracy of manufacturing techniques for cobalt chromium fixed dental prostheses,
Biomater Investig Dent, 7:31–40, 2020.
Takaichi A, Suyalatu, Nakamoto T, et al: Microstructures and mechanical
properties of Co-29Cr-6Mo alloy fabricated by selective laser melting
process for dental applications, J Mech Behav Biomed Mater, 21:67–
76, 2013.
An advanced study of the microstructure of Co-Cr alloy specimens
fabricated by selective laser melting. The anisotropy in mechanical
properties resulting from different build directions for the tensile test
specimens was investigated, along with elution of elements into a lactic acid solution.
Togaya T, Suzuki M, Tsutsumi S, et al: An application of pure titanium to
the metal porcelain system, Dent Mater J, 2:210–219, 1983.
This paper highlights the potential of porcelain bonding to CP Ti and
the importance of matched expansion coefficients of metal and porcelain on the bond strength of the bonded metal-ceramic specimens.
Vallittu PK, Kokkonen M: Deflection fatigue of cobalt-chromium, titanium, and gold alloy cast denture clasp, J Prosthet Dent, 74:412–419,
1995.
The results of this study suggest that significant differences exist in the
fatigue resistance of removable denture clasps made from different commercial cast metals, which may cause loss of retention and clasp failures.
van der Lingen E: Aspects of coloured precious metal intermetallic compounds, J S Afr I Min Metall, 114:137–144, 2014.
A review article that discusses gold, platinum, and palladium colored
intermetallic compounds from metal physics and crystal structure

201.e2

viewpoints. Excellent references are provided, including a dental alloy
patent.
Vreeburg KJ, de Groot K, von Blomberg M, et al: Induction of immunological tolerance by oral administration of nickel and chromium,
J Dent Res, 63:124–128, 1984.
This article describes the effects of oral administration of nickel and
chromium to guinea pigs.
Wang XC, Laoui T, Bonse J, et al: Direct selective laser sintering of hard
metal powders: experimental study and simulation, Int J Adv Manuf
Technol, 19:351–357, 2002.
The metallurgical processes that occur during selective laser sintering
of metal powder are described.
Wettstein F, Sailer I, Roos M, et al: Clinical study of the internal gaps of
zirconia and metal frameworks for fixed partial dentures, Eur J Oral
Sci, 116:272–279, 2008.
The study shows posterior three-unit FPDs incorporating milled
zirconia frameworks exhibited larger internal gaps than those constructed using conventional metal-ceramic techniques.
Metal Joining
Byrne G: Soldering in prosthodontics—an overview, Part I, J Prosthodont,
20:233–243, 2011.
Kaylakie WG, Brukl CE: Comparative tensile strengths of nonnoble dental alloy solders, J Prosthet Dent, 53:455–462, 1985.
Tensile strengths and failure sites of a large number of base metal solders are described. In addition, various soldering technique variables
are studied, and a radiographic method for evaluating soldered joints
is described.
Nuñez-Pantoja JMC, Takahashi JMFK, Nóbilo MAdeA, et al: Radiographic inspection of porosity in Ti-6Al-4V laser-welded joints, Braz
Oral Res, 25:103–108, 2011.
Perveen A, Molardi C, Forniani C: Applications of laser welding in
dentistry: A state-of-the-art review, Micromachines, 2018;9(1-23)
209.
Wang RR, Welsch GE: Joining titanium materials with tungsten inert-gas
welding, laser-welding, and infrared brazing, J Prosthet Dent, 74:521–
530, 1995.
Wrought Alloys
Alapati SB, Brantley WA, Iijima M, et al: Micro-XRD and temperaturemodulated DSC investigation of nickel-titanium rotary endodontic
instruments, Dent Mater, 25:1221–1229, 2009.
Alapati SB, Brantley WA, Nusstein JM, et al: Vickers hardness investigation of work-hardening in used NiTi rotary instruments, J Endod,
32:1191–1193, 2006.
Two articles from a series of publications by this research group on
SEM observations of nickel-titanium rotary endodontic instruments.
Alapati SB, Brantley WA, Iijima M, et al: Metallurgical characterization of a new nickel-titanium wire for rotary endodontic instruments, J Endod, 35:1589–1593, 2009.
TEM, TMDSC, and Micro-XRD analyses of the M-wire for rotary
endodontic instruments.
Alapati SB, Brantley WA, Svec TA, et al: SEM observations of nickeltitanium rotary endodontic instruments that fractured during clinical
use, J Endod, 31:40–43, 2005.
Two rotary instrument products containing transformable austenite
were analyzed in the as-received and clinically used conditions, and
after heat treatment at temperatures from 400 °C–850 °C.
Andreasen GF, Morrow RE: Laboratory and clinical analyses of Nitinol
wire, Am J Orthod, 73:142–151, 1978.
This classic article describes the laboratory properties and clinical
uses of the first commercially available nickel-titanium orthodontic
wire.
Asgharnia MK, Brantley WA: Complete bending and tensile data for various sizes of the four common orthodontic archwire alloys comparison of bending and tension tests for orthodontic wires, Am J Orthod,
89:228–236, 1986.

Brantley W, Berzins D, Iijima M, et al: Structure/property relationships
in orthodontic alloys. In Eliades T, Brantley WA, editors: Orthodontic Applications of Biomaterials: A Clinical Guide, 2017, Elsevier.
This chapter in a recently published book provides a comprehensive
account of current orthodontic alloys used for wires, brackets, and
other appliances. Another chapter discusses the use of nickel-titanium
products in orthodontic practice.
Brantley WA: Orthodontic wires. In Brantley WA, Eliades T, editors:
Orthodontic Wires: Scientific and Clinical Aspects, Stuttgart, Germany,
2001, Thieme.
This comprehensive chapter on orthodontic wires in an older book
contains an extensive discussion of x-ray diffraction and differential
scanning calorimetric analyses of nickel-titanium wires.
Brantley WA, Guo W, Clark WAT, et al: Microstructural studies of 35 °C
copper Ni-Ti orthodontic wire and TEM confirmation of low-temperature martensite transformation, Dent Mater, 24:204–210, 2008.
TEM examination revealed that the very low-temperature transformation in NiTi wires is twinning in the martensite structure. Optical
microscope, SEM, and TEM images, along with important electron
diffraction patterns, were presented.
Brantley WA, Iijima M, Grentzer TH: Temperature-modulated DSC
provides new insight about nickel-titanium wire transformations, Am
J Orthod Dentofac, 124:387–394, 2003.
The first use of TMDSC to investigate NiTi orthodontic wires. Much
more information about transformations is obtained compared to
conventional DSC. Superelastic and shape memory wires were analyzed. A low-temperature martensite transformation of unknown
character was observed.
Brantley WA, Luebke NH, Luebke FL, et al: Performance of engine-driven
rotary endodontic instruments with a superimposed bending deflection: V. Gates Glidden and Peeso drills, J Endod, 20:241–245, 1994.
A series of articles describing the effects of torsion, bending, and
bending fatigue on stainless steel rotary instruments. The micrographs
are of particular interest.
Brantley WA, Svec TA, Iijima M, et al: Differential scanning calorimetric
studies of nickel titanium rotary endodontic instruments, J Endod,
28:567–572, 2002.
The first extensive use of DSC to investigate NiTi transformations in
rotary instruments. Differences in transformation characteristics for
three products were attributed to differences in manufacturer processing.
Brick RM, Pense AW, Gordon RB: Structure and Properties of Engineering
Materials, ed 4, New York, 1977, McGraw-Hill.
An undergraduate engineering textbook that discusses carbon steels,
stainless steels, titanium alloys, and deformation and strengthening
mechanisms for metals.
Bryant ST, Thompson SA, al-Omari MA, et al: Shaping ability of ProFile
rotary nickel-titanium instruments with ISO sized tips in simulated
root canals: Part 1 & Part 2, Int Endod J, 31:275–289, 1998.
This research group has published several articles evaluating the ability
of a variety of rotary endodontic instruments to shape root canals.
Burstone CJ: Application of bioengineering to clinical orthodontics. In
Graber TM, Vanarsdall RL, editors: Orthodontics: Current Principles
and Techniques, ed 3, St Louis, 2000, Mosby.
The application of mechanics to clinical orthodontics is described.
The relationship between alloy properties, wire geometry, and appliance force systems is also explained.
Burstone CJ, Goldberg AJ: Beta titanium: A new orthodontic alloy, Am J
Orthod, 77:121–132, 1980.
This classic article was concurrent with the introduction of the betatitanium orthodontic wires and presents clinical applications, as well
as a brief review of the other wire alloys.
Burstone CJ, Goldberg AJ: Maximum forces and deflections from orthodontic appliances, Am J Orthod, 84:95–103, 1983.
Maximal properties of various orthodontic wire sizes and alloys are
presented and related to theoretically predicted values, assuming complete elastic behavior.

Dieter GE: Mechanical Metallurgy, ed 3, New York, 1986, McGraw-Hill.
An undergraduate engineering textbook that contains highly readable
descriptions of strengthening mechanisms, fracture processes, and the
mechanical testing of metals.
Duerig TW, Melton KN, Stöckel D, et al, editors: Engineering Aspects of
Shape Memory Alloys, London, 1990, Butterworth-Heinemann.
A highly readable account of the shape memory phenomenon and
shape memory alloys. A variety of dental and medical applications for
shape memory alloys are discussed.
Elnaghy AM, Elsaka SE: Cyclic fatigue resistance of One Curve, 2Shape,
ProFile Vortex, Vortex Blue, and RaCe nickel-titanium rotary instruments in single and double curvature canals, J Endod, 44:1725–1730,
2018.
This recent article compares the results of laboratory fatigue resistance
for several rotary instrument products and provides leads into the literature for this highly active research area.
Gatto E, Matarese G, Di Bella G, et al: Load-deflection characteristics
of superelastic and thermal nickel-titanium wires, Eur J Orthod,
35:115–123, 2013.
Three-point bending plots for seven NiTi wires tested in a manner
similar to the current ISO wire standard. Composition information is
provided for the different NiTi alloys.
Iijima M, Brantley WA, Yuasa T, et al: Joining characteristics of
β-titanium wires with electrical resistance welding, J Biomed Mater
Res B, 85:378–384, 2008.
This study shows that welding of β-titanium alloy using electrical resistance in air may not adversely affect clinically important
mechanical properties. Scanning microscope observations indicated
that the localized permanent deformation and the formation of an
undesirable equiaxed grain structure occurred with the use of narrow
electrodes.
Iijima M, Muguruma T, Brantley WA, et al: Comparisons of nanoindentation, 3-point bending, and tension tests for orthodontic wires, Am J
Orthod Dentofac, 140:65–71, 2011.
Five wires were examined: 1 stainless steel, 1 cobalt-chromium-nickel,
1 beta-titanium, and 2 nickel-titanium. Differences observed for the
nanoindentation and conventional mechanical property tests were
attributed to the differences in the volume of material examined,
work-hardening levels, and the oxide layer on the wire surface.
Johnson E, Lloyd A, Kuttler S, et al: Comparison between a novel nickeltitanium alloy and 508 nitinol on the cyclic fatigue life of ProFile
25/.04 rotary instruments, J Endod, 34:1406–1409, 2008.
Introduction of the new M-wire alloy that provides increased fatigue
resistance for NiTi rotary endodontic instruments.
Khier SE, Brantley WA, Fournelle RA: Structure and mechanical properties of as-received and heat-treated stainless steel orthodontic wires,
Am J Orthod Dentofac, 93:206–212, 1988.
X-ray diffraction analyses in this classic article show that austenitic
stainless steel orthodontic wires can also contain a bcc martensite
phase, depending upon the alloy composition and wire processing.
The heat treatment response of stainless steel orthodontic wires is
explained.
Khier SE, Brantley WA, Fournelle RA: Bending properties of superelastic
and nonsuperelastic nickel-titanium orthodontic wires, Am J Orthod
Dentofac, 99:310–318, 1991.
Cantilever bending plots for as-received and heat-treated wires, following the protocol in the former ADA Specification No. 32, were
obtained for different wire products from six manufacturers. Different
heat treatment responses and amounts of springback occur for the
superelastic and nonsuperelastic wires.
Kim HC, Yum J, Hur B, Cheung GS: Cyclic fatigue and fracture characteristics of ground and twisted nickel-titanium rotary files, J Endod,
36:147–152, 2010.
[Comments by Sabala G: J Endod, 36:951, 2010; author reply 951.]
The processing of the new twisted NiTi files is presented, and their
fatigue performance is compared to NiTi files that are machined from
the starting wire blanks.

201.e3

Kusy RP: A review of contemporary archwires: their properties and characteristics, Angle Orthod, 67:197–207, 1997.
The historical introduction to orthodontics for each of the four major
wire alloy types is presented. The summary for the nickel-titanium
wire alloys is excellent. The classifications of martensite-stabilized,
austenite-active, and martensite-active is introduced for the NiTi
wires.
Kusy RP, Greenberg AR: Effects of composition and cross section on the
elastic properties of orthodontic archwires, Angle Orthod, 51:325–
341, 1981.
A comprehensive derivation of the effects of wire shape, wire size,
and alloy type on the strength, stiffness, and range properties in the
elastic region.
Miura R, Mogi M, Ohura Y, et al: The super-elastic property of the Japanese Ni-Ti alloy wire for use in orthodontics, Am J Orthod Dentofac,
90:1–10, 1986.
A classic article that first described the metallurgy, mechanical properties, and clinical applications of nickel-titanium orthodontic wires
possessing superelastic characteristics.
Parr JG, Hanson A: An Introduction to Stainless Steel. Metals Park, OH,
1971, American Society for Metals.
A useful review of the applications, metallurgy, mechanical properties,
and corrosion principles for stainless steel.
Sarkar NK, Redmond W, Schwaninger B, et al: The chloride corrosion
behavior of four orthodontic wires, J Oral Rehabil, 10:121–128, 1983.
A classic article that presents the in vitro cyclic potentiodynamic
polarization of stainless steel, cobalt-chromium-nickel, beta-titanium,
and nickel-titanium orthodontic wires.
Shen Y, Coil JM, Zhou H, et al: HyFlex nickel-titanium rotary instruments after clinical use: metallurgical properties, Int Endod J, 46:720–
729, 2013.

201.e4

Shen Y, Zhou HM, Zheng YF, et al: Metallurgical characterization
of controlled memory wire nickel-titanium rotary instruments,
J Endod, 37:1566–1571, 2011.
SEM examination, XRD analyses, and Vickers hardness measurements were performed for controlled-memory NiTi rotary instruments. The low risk for these instruments fracturing in the root canal
is noted.
Thompson SA: An overview of nickel-titanium alloys used in dentistry,
Int Endod J, 33:297–310, 2000.
A review article describing the shape memory effect and the manufacture of nickel-titanium endodontic instruments.
Verstrynge A, Van Humbeeck J, Willems G: In-vitro evaluation of the
material characteristics of stainless steel and beta-titanium orthodontic wires, Am J Orthod Dentofac, 130:460–470, 2006.
Information about compositions, mechanical properties, and value of
surface roughness is provided for several different stainless steel and
beta-titanium wire products.
Walia H, Brantley WA, Gerstein H: An initial investigation of the bending and torsional properties of Nitinol root canal files, J Endod,
14:346–351, 1988.
The original article that stimulated the interest of the endodontic profession and manufacturers in the use of nickel-titanium root canal
instruments.
Zinelis S, Annousaki O, Eliades T, et al: Metallographic structure and
hardness of titanium orthodontic brackets, J Orofac Orthop, 264:426–
433, 2003.
Zinelis S, Annousaki O, Makou M, et al: Metallurgical characterization of orthodontic brackets produced by Metal Injection Molding
(MIM), Angle Orthod, 75:1024–1031, 2005.
Manufacturing processes for titanium orthodontic brackets are described.
Information is also provided about stainless steel bracket alloys.

10

Ceramic-Based Materials
OUTLINE
General Properties of Ceramic Materials

CAD-CAM Processing of Ceramics

History of Dental Ceramics

Methods for Strengthening Ceramic Restorations

Metal-Ceramic Systems

Principles for Selection of Dental Ceramics

Ceramic-Ceramic or All-Ceramic Systems

IdentCeram Certificates for Identification of Ceramic Products

KEY TERMS
Ceramic, CAD-CAM Ceramic that is formulated for the production
of the whole or part of a ceramic prosthesis through the use of a
computer-aided design, computer-aided manufacturing process.
Ceramic, castable Glass or other ceramic specially formulated to
be cast into a refractory mold as a core coping or framework for
a ceramic prosthesis.
Ceramic, core Opaque or semitranslucent crystalline dental ceramic material that provides sufficient strength, toughness, and
stiffness to support overlying layers of veneering ceramics.
Ceramic, dental Inorganic compound with nonmetallic properties typically consisting of oxygen and one or more metallic (or
semimetallic) and/or nonmetallic elements, such as aluminum,
calcium, lithium, magnesium, potassium, silicon, sodium, tin,
titanium, and zirconium. Ceramic frits that are provided in a
powder form for veneering (layering) ceramics are typically
composed of a mixture of glass and crystalline particles.
Ceramic, glaze Specially formulated ceramic powder that, when
mixed with a liquid, applied to a ceramic surface, and heated
to an appropriate temperature for a sufficient time, forms a
smooth, glassy layer on a dental ceramic surface.
Ceramic, hot-pressed (pressable ceramic) Ceramic that can be
heated to a flow temperature and forced under isostatic pressure to fill a cavity in a refractory mold.
Ceramic, stain Mixture of one or more pigmented metal oxides and
a low-fusing glass that can modify the shade of the ceramic-based
restoration; this mixture is dispersed in an aqueous medium, applied to the surface of porcelain or other dental ceramic, and heated
to the vitrification temperature of this material for a specific time.
Glass-ceramic Ceramic consisting of at least one glass phase and
at least one crystalline phase that is produced by a controlled
crystallization of the glass.
Glass-infiltrated core ceramic A partially sintered core ceramic
with a porous structure that is densified by the capillary inflow
of a molten glass.
Green state Term referring to an as-pressed or minimally sintered
condition prior to final sintering.

202

Metal-ceramic prosthesis A partial crown, full crown, or fixed
partial denture made with a metal substructure to which porcelain is bonded for aesthetic enhancement via an intermediate metal oxide layer. The terms porcelain fused to metal (PFM),
porcelain bonded to metal (PBM), porcelain to metal (PTM), and
ceramometal are also used to describe these prostheses, but
metal-ceramic (MC) is the term accepted internationally.
Porcelain A relatively dense, white ceramic material produced by
sintering a mixture of feldspar, kaolin, quartz, and other substances, strictly referring to those containing kaolin.
Porcelain, feldspathic Ceramic composed of a glass matrix phase
and one or more crystalline phases, such as leucite (KAlSi2O6),
sanidine (KAlSi3O8), and apatite [Ca5(PO4)3(F, Cl, OH)]. Most commercial dental porcelains designed for metal-ceramic restorations are partially crystallized feldspathic glasses that consist
of tetragonal leucite (K2O•Al2O3•4SiO2) crystals in a glass-phase
matrix.
Sintering Process of heating closely packed particles below the
melting point of the main component to densify and strengthen
a structure as a result of bonding, diffusion, and flow phenomena.
Spinel or spinelle Crystalline mineral composed of mixed oxides
such as MgO•Al2O3.
Thermal compatibility Condition of low transient and residual
tensile stress in ceramic adjacent to a metal or ceramic core
that is associated with a small difference in the coefficients of
thermal contraction between the core material and the veneering ceramic.
Transformation toughening A ceramic-strengthening mechanism that occurs through transformation of crystalline structure.
For example, the stress-activated tetragonal (t) to monoclinic
(m) transformation in yttria-stabilized zirconia causes slight
volume expansion at the crack tip that keeps the crack from
propagating and raises the stress needed to keep the crack
propagation to fracture the prosthesis.

CHAPTER 10

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which property best describes the fracture resistance of dental ceramics?

Dental ceramics consist of silicate glasses, porcelains, glassceramics, or highly crystalline solids. They are nonmetallic,
inorganic structures, primarily containing compounds of oxygen
with one or more metallic or semimetallic elements (aluminum,
boron, calcium, cerium, lithium, magnesium, phosphorus, potassium, silicon, sodium, titanium, and zirconium). Many dental
ceramics contain a crystal phase and a silicate glass matrix phase.
Silicate glasses differ from nonsilicate glasses in that silicon is the
central divalent cation that is bound to four relatively large oxygen anions that link in a random order to other tetrahedra to
form polymeric-type (SiO2)n chains. Their structures are characterized by chains of (SiO4)–4 tetrahedra in which Si4+ cations are
positioned at the center of each tetrahedron, with O– anions at
each of the four corners (Figure 10-1). The resulting structure is
not closely packed and exhibits both covalent and ionic bonds.
The SiO4 tetrahedra are linked together by sharing their corners
and not their edges or faces. They are arranged as linked chains
of tetrahedra, each of which contains two oxygen atoms for every
silicon atom. In industry, the term porcelain is generally associated
with ceramics produced with a significant amount of kaolinite
[Al2Si2O5(OH)4 or Al2O3•2SiO2•2H2O]. Kaolinite is a form of
kaolin, which is a type of clay. None of the modern low-fusing
or ultralow-fusing porcelains contains any clay product such as
kaolinite.

General Properties of Ceramic Materials
The properties of ceramics are customized for dental applications
by precisely controlling the types and amounts of the components
used in their production. Ceramics exhibit chemical, mechanical,
physical, and thermal properties that distinguish them from metals, acrylic resins, and resin-based composites. Most ceramics are
characterized by their biocompatibility, aesthetic potential, refractory nature, high hardness, low to moderate fracture toughness,

Ceramic-Based Materials

203

excellent wear resistance, susceptibility to tensile fracture, and
chemical inertness.

Chemical Properties
Chemical inertness is an important characteristic because this
ensures that the chemically stable surface of dental restorations
does not release potentially harmful elements and reduces the risk
of surface roughening with increased abrasiveness or increased
susceptibility to bacterial adhesion over time. The chemical inertness also makes ceramics more resistant to corrosion than plastics.
Ceramics do not react readily with most liquids, gases, alkalis,
and weak acids. They also remain relatively stable over long time
periods, although they have been shown to undergo corrosion in
simulated oral environments.
Acidulated phosphate fluoride (APF), one of the most commonly used fluoride gels for caries control, is known to etch glass
by selective leaching of sodium ions, thereby disrupting the silica
network. When glazed feldspathic porcelain is exposed to 1.23%
APF or 8% stannous fluoride, surface roughness is produced
within 4 minutes. As shown in Figure 10-2, a 30-minute exposure
to 1.23% APF gel resulted in preferential attack of the glass phase
(areas with white precipitate particles) of a body porcelain. However, the use of neutral gel, such as 0.4% stannous fluoride and
2% sodium fluoride, has no significant effect on the ceramic surface. Dentists should be aware of these long-term clinical effects
of fluorides on ceramic and composite restorations and avoid the
use of APF gels when composites and ceramics are present. APF
gels should not be used on glazed porcelain surfaces. If the use of
such a gel is needed, the surface of these restorations should be
protected with petroleum jelly, cocoa butter, or wax.

CRITICAL QUESTION
If tensile strength is not a reliable property of dental ceramics, which property
is a better measure of the material’s fracture resistance?

Mechanical Properties
Ceramics exhibit good to excellent strength and fracture toughness.
Zirconium dioxide is one of the strongest and toughest ceramics
and has a flexural strength similar to that of steel, but this material’s fracture toughness is much lower than that of steel. Although

• Figure 10-1 Amorphous structure of potassium silicate glass.

• Figure 10-2 Surface of feldspathic gingival (body) porcelain after a
30-minute exposure to 1.23% acidulated phosphate fluoride.

204

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

ceramics are strong and heat-resistant, these materials are brittle
and may fracture without warning when flexed excessively or when
quickly heated and cooled (i.e., under thermal shock conditions).

Resistance to Tensile Fracture
The susceptibility to tensile fracture is a drawback, particularly
when flaws and tensile stress coexist in the same region of a ceramic
prosthesis. Strength is not an inherent property of ceramics
because this property varies with specimen size, specimen length,
specimen shape, loading rate, surface preparation methods, and
the environment. For example, the strength of silica-based ceramics increases with a decrease in specimen thickness, an increase in
stressing rate, and a smoother surface. Such variability indicates
that strength is not necessarily a bulk property because surface
conditions can significantly alter the mean strength and the spread
of experimental values, as indicated by the Weibull modulus and
the coefficient of variation (Chapter 4, Weibull Modulus). Therefore the tensile strength of ceramics is not a useful parameter to
describe the fracture resistance.
The general belief is that dental ceramics fail primarily because
of their brittle nature. From a fracture mechanics point of view,
the major reason for the fracture of ceramics is their low resistance
to crack growth. Two fracture-mechanics properties that better
explain this behavior are fracture toughness and critical strain
energy release rate. Fracture toughness, which is designated as
KIc, describes the critical stress intensity factor based on a Mode I
(see Figure 4-14, C) crack opening under tensile stress. For dental
ceramics, KIc varies from 0.8 MPa∙m1/2 for feldspathic porcelain to
8 MPa∙m1/2 or more for yttria-stabilized zirconia to 12 MPa∙m1/2
or more for ceria-stabilized alumina-zirconia ceramic. In comparison, KIc values are 0.7 to 1.3 MPa∙m1/2 for enamel, 3.1 MPa∙m1/2
for dentin, and 0.8 to 2.5 MPa∙m1/2 for resin composites.
The critical strain energy release rate, which is designated as GIc,
is a measure of the strain energy that is released per unit increase in
crack area as a ceramic with flaws or cracks is loaded progressively.
The subscript I refers to the crack-opening mode under tension as
expressed for KIc. Comparative values of KIc (MPa∙m1/2) versus GIc
(kJ/m2) for different types of materials are as follows: (1) ductile
metals, 150 versus 50 to 200; (2) brittle metals, 25 versus 1 to 5;
and (3) soda-lime glass, 0.8 versus 0.5.
Abrasiveness to Enamel
In spite of their overall excellence in meeting the ideal requirements
of a prosthetic material, dental ceramics can cause catastrophic wear
of opposing tooth structure under certain conditions because of
their hardness. Wear is a form of fracture that occurs microscopically on the surface. The most extreme damage occurs because of
bruxing, premature occlusal contacts, and/or inadequate occlusal
adjustments. When cuspid-guided disocclusion is ensured, the wear
of opposing enamel and dentin will be greatly reduced. The abrasive
wear of opposing tooth structure can be reduced further by periodically refinishing the occlusal surface after frequent exposures to
carbonated beverages and/or acidulated phosphate fluoride.
The microfracture is the dominant mechanism responsible for
the damage that a roughened ceramic surface can cause to tooth
enamel surfaces. Enamel is susceptible to this kind of microfracture (Figure 10-3) through four specific mechanisms: (1)
asperities extending from the ceramic surface that produce high
localized stresses and microfracture; (2) gouging that results from
high stresses and large hardness differences between two surfaces
or particles extending from these surfaces; (3) impact or erosion
that occurs through the action of abrasive particles carried in a

• Figure 10-3 Excessive wear of mandibular teeth that were abraded by
opposing porcelain surfaces. (Courtesy Dr. H. Young.)

flowing liquid, such as saliva; and (4) contact stress microfracture
that increases localized tensile stress and also enhances the damage
caused by asperities, gouging, and impact or erosion. Because of
microfracture mechanisms, polishing the ceramic surface periodically to reduce the height of asperities and to minimize enamel
wear rates is necessary and highly recommended.
The abrasiveness of ceramics against enamel is affected by
numerous factors and properties of the crystal-phase particles
and the glass matrix (if present). These include ceramic properties such as hardness, tensile strength, fracture toughness, fatigue
resistance, particle–glass bonding, particle–glass interface integrity, and chemical durability. The oral environment also affects the
abrasiveness, such as frequency of exposure to corrosive chemical
agents (acidulated phosphate fluoride, carbonated beverages), abrasiveness of foods, residual stress, subsurface quality (voids or other
imperfections), magnitude and orientation of applied forces, chewing patterns, bruxing frequency, contact area, lubrication by saliva,
and duration of exposure to abrasive particles. All of these factors
can lead to wear of the ceramic, with the production of roughened
surfaces that can in turn abrade the opposing enamel. As a general
rule, the larger the hardness difference between two sliding surfaces, the greater the degree of wear. However, this simple principle
does not explain the wide variation in wear rates that is exhibited
by different patients under apparently similar conditions.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can the potential abrasive damage of tooth enamel that opposes
ceramic surfaces be minimized?

Biological Properties
By virtue of their chemical inertness and resistance to corrosion,
ceramics are very biocompatible restorative materials because they
do not release any harmful agents to the oral environment. There
have been reports of traces of lead in feldspathic-based ceramic
powders up to 250 ppm. The presence of lead stems from the
use of the natural mineral feldspar in the ceramic. The American
Dental Association (ADA) Specification 69 states that the maximum allowable concentration of lead in dental ceramic powder
is 300 ppm. The main issue is not the total amount of lead in

CHAPTER 10

the powder but the leaching potential of lead or solubility of the
ceramic restoration in the oral cavity. International Organization
for Standardization (ISO 6872) has established a solubility testing
standard for dental ceramics but no specific values for the maximum allowable release of lead. Solubility testing standards are considered harsher than the conditions in the oral environment and
are representative of a lifetime of use. The amount of lead released
after exposure to 4% acetic acid at 80 °C for 16 hours was not
detectable according to several independent studies. The limits of
detection (LOD) established for these studies were at 5 and 10 ppb
(μg/L), at which no lead was detected. If lead was indeed released,
the level was below the 5 ppb level and is considered insignificant.

Physical Properties
Two other important attributes of dental ceramics are their potential for matching the appearance of natural teeth and their low
electrical and thermal conductivities.

Color-Matching Ability and Aesthetic Qualities
Dental ceramics are excellent in matching the appearance of natural teeth because they can display translucency, color, and chroma.
Color phenomena and terminology are discussed in Chapter 3,
Color and Optical Effects. Perfect color matching is extremely difficult and demands exceptional skill and experience on the part of
the dentist and lab technician. The structure of the tooth influences
its color. Dentin is opaquer than enamel and reflects light very well.
Enamel represents a predominantly crystalline layer over the dentin
and is composed of tiny prisms or rods cemented together by an
organic substance. The indices of refraction of the rods and the
cementing substance are different. As a result, light rays are dispersed by varying proportions of absorption, transmission, scattering, and reflection to produce a resulting translucent effect and
a sensation of depth as the scattered light ray reaches the eye. As
light strikes the tooth surface, part of the light is reflected, and the
remainder penetrates the enamel and is scattered. Any light reaching the dentin is either absorbed or partially reflected to the eye and
partially scattered within the enamel. If dentin is not present, as in
the tip of an incisor, some of the light rays may be transmitted into
the oral cavity. As a result, this area may appear to be more translucent than that toward the gingival area. Because the law of energy
conservation must apply, the following relationship shows the five
energy components that are derived from the energy (E) of the incident light: Eincident = Escattered + Ereflected + Eabsorbed + Etransmitted + Efluoresced.
Although some of the absorbed light may be converted into
heat, some may be transmitted back to the eye as fluorescent energy.
Light rays can also be dispersed, giving a color or shade that varies
in different teeth. The dispersion can vary with the wavelength of
the light. Therefore the appearance of the teeth may vary according
to whether they are viewed in direct sunlight, reflected daylight,
tungsten light, or fluorescent light. This phenomenon is called
metamerism. The dentist and laboratory technician must reproduce
the aesthetic characteristics sufficiently such that the appearance of
a ceramic prosthesis is discernable only to the trained eye.
Specimens of ceramic shades are produced and distributed in
a specific order in shade guides by dental ceramic manufacturers
to assist dentists and lab technicians in selecting optimum ceramic
shades and for communicating the desired prosthesis appearance
to each other. Shade guides made of porcelain are used most often
by dentists to describe the desired appearance of a natural tooth or
ceramic prosthesis. However, there are several deficiencies of shade
guides. Shade-guide tabs are much thicker than the thickness of

Ceramic-Based Materials

205

ceramic that is used for dental crowns or veneers, and they are
more translucent than teeth and ceramic crowns that are backed
by a nontranslucent dentin substructure, veneering ceramics that
are backed by an opaque core ceramic, or a metal framework.
Much of the incident light is transmitted through a tab. In contrast, most of the incident light on a crown is reflected except at
the incisal edge and at proximal incisal areas. Furthermore, the
necks of shade tabs are made from a deeper hue, and this region
tends to distract the matching ability of the observer in the gingival third of the tab. To avoid this situation, some clinicians grind
away the neck area of a set of shade tabs.
The production of color sensation with a pigment is a physically
different phenomenon from that obtained by optical reflection,
refraction, and dispersion. The color of a pigment is determined by
selective absorption and selective reflection. For example, if white
light is reflected from a red surface, all the light with a wavelength different from that of red is absorbed, and only the red light is reflected.
If a red hue is present in a ceramic crown, but the red hue of the same
wavelength is not present in the light beam, the tooth will appear as
a different shade. If the tooth or restoration surface is rough, most
of the light will be scattered, and little will penetrate the structure.

Conductivity
Ceramics also offer freedom from galvanic effects (low electrical conductivity). Because the metal atoms transfer their outermost electrons to the nonmetallic atoms and stabilize their highly
mobile electrons, ceramics are also excellent thermal (low thermal
conductivity and low thermal diffusivity) and electrical insulators.
Thus tooth sensitivity associated with metallic restorations that are
electrical and thermal conductors is minimized.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which two inventions dramatically increased the success and survival
probability of metal-ceramic (MC) restorations?

History of Dental Ceramics
The first porcelain tooth material was patented in 1789 by de
Chemant, a French dentist, and Duchateau, a French pharmacist.
This product was an improved version of “mineral paste teeth”
but was not used to produce individual teeth because there was
no effective way to attach the teeth to a denture base material. In
1808, Fonzi, an Italian dentist, invented a “terrometallic” porcelain tooth that was held in place by a platinum pin or frame. Planteau, a French dentist, introduced porcelain teeth to the United
States in 1817, and Peale, an artist, developed a baking process in
Philadelphia for these teeth in 1822. Commercial production of
these teeth began in 1825 by Stockton. In England, Ash developed
an improved version of the porcelain tooth in 1837. In 1844, the
nephew of Stockton founded the S.S. White Company, which led
to further refinement of the design and the mass production of
porcelain denture teeth.
Dr. Charles Land, the grandfather of aviator Charles Lindbergh, introduced one of the first ceramic crowns to dentistry
in 1903 using a platinum foil matrix (also known as coping) and
high-fusing feldspathic porcelain. These crowns exhibited excellent aesthetics, but the low flexural strength of porcelain resulted
in a high incidence of fractures. Although feldspathic porcelains
with reliable chemical bonding have been used in MC prostheses,
they were considered to be too weak to use reliably in the construction of all-ceramic crowns without a tougher ceramic core,

206

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

a cast-metal core, or metal-foil coping. Furthermore, their firing
shrinkage resulted in significant discrepancies in fit and adaptation of margins unless correction firings were performed.
In 1959, Weinstein et al. filed U.S. Patent 3,052,982, which
described formulations of feldspathic porcelains with a wide range
of expansion coefficients that also bonded chemically to and were
thermally compatible with the existing alloys of the time. The first
commercial porcelain was developed by VITA Zahnfabrik around
1963. Although the first VITA porcelain products were known for
their aesthetic properties, the subsequent introduction of the more
versatile Ceramco porcelain (Dentsply Sirona) exhibited thermalexpansion behavior that allowed this porcelain to be used safely
with a wider variety of alloys. Significant developments in the
areas of MC properties, design, and performance, such as opalescence, specialized internal staining techniques, greening-resistant
porcelains, porcelain butt-joint margins, and shoulder porcelains,
have significantly enhanced the overall appearance and “vitality”
of MC crowns and bridges and the clinical survivability of these
restorations.
McLean and Hughes in 1965 introduced fracture-resistant allporcelain crowns made of dental aluminous core ceramic, a glass
matrix containing 40 to 50 wt% Al2O3 fillers. A feldspathic porcelain veneer was required to achieve acceptable aesthetics because
of the chalky-white appearance of the aluminous porcelain core
material. A 5-year fracture rate report showed only 2% for anterior crowns but an unacceptable 15% when aluminous porcelain
was used for molar crowns. Relatively large sintering shrinkage
(about 15% to 20%) of the core material and the use of a 20- to
25-μm-thick platinum foil have made marginal adaptation difficult to achieve except by highly skilled laboratory technicians. The
principal indication for the use of aluminous porcelain crowns is
the restoration of maxillary anterior crowns when aesthetics is of
paramount importance.
Since the introduction of aluminous porcelain crowns and
methods to produce durable MC crowns in the 1960s, improvements in the composition of ceramics and the method of forming
all-ceramic crowns have greatly enhanced the ability to produce
more accurate-fitting and fracture-resistant crowns made entirely
of ceramic material. An all-ceramic system developed by controlling the crystallization of a glass (Dicor) was demonstrated
by Adair and Grossman in 1984 and, later, a machinable glassceramic version (Dicor MGC), which had a tetrasilicic fluormica
crystal volume of approximately 70%. In the early 1990s, a pressable glass-ceramic (IPS Empress), which contained approximately
34 vol% leucite, was introduced. A more fracture resistant, pressable glass-ceramic (IPS Empress 2) containing approximately
70 vol% of lithia disilicate crystals was introduced in the late
1990s. This core ceramic has been used for three-unit fixed dental
prostheses (FDPs) as far posterior as the second premolar. Other
systems based on Al2O3 and zirconia will be discussed later. Significant progress has been made toward the goal of developing less
abrasive veneering ceramics.
In the succeeding sections, the discussion will focus on MC
systems, all-ceramic systems, ceramic-strengthening mechanisms,
and indications for the use of ceramic materials in greater detail.

Metal-Ceramic Systems
Several clinical studies have confirmed the high overall survival
percentages of MC prostheses. In this chapter, the term metalceramic or MC is used synonymously with porcelain fused to metal
(PFM), although the former term is the most internationally

• Figure 10-4 Schematic illustration of a metal-ceramic (porcelain fused
to metal) crown that has a facial metal thickness of 0.3 to 0.5 mm. It is
veneered with opaque porcelain approximately 0.3 mm in thickness, and
the body porcelain is about 1 mm thick.

accepted descriptor for these types of prosthetic material systems.
One clinical study revealed that the fracture rate of MC crowns
and bridges made from a high noble alloy was as low as 2.3% after
7.5 years. The most outstanding advantage of MC restorations is
their resistance to fracture. With metal occlusal surfaces, the fracture rate in posterior sites could be reduced further. Depending
on the ceramic material used, another potential advantage of MC
over all-ceramic restorations is that less tooth structure needs to
be removed to provide the proper bulk for the crown, especially if
metal alone is used on occlusal and lingual surfaces and porcelain
butt-joint margins are used on facial and buccal surfaces. Such
designs also cause less wear of antagonist enamel than occurs when
enamel is opposed by a ceramic surface.
A dark line at the facial margin of an MC crown that is associated
with a metal collar or metal margin is of significant concern when
gingival recession occurs. This adverse aesthetic result can be minimized by designing the crown with a ceramic margin or by using a
very thin knife-edge margin of metal that is veneered with opaque
shoulder porcelain (Figure 10-4). This ceramic margin should be
polished and/or glazed to avoid a rough surface at the margin.
One of the most frequently mentioned disadvantages is the
potential for metal allergy. Such allergic reactions are very rare,
except, possibly, when nickel-based alloys are used. Nonetheless,
MC crowns are decreasing in popularity for use in anterior restorations. An improvement in the properties of all-ceramic crowns
offers a greater potential for success in matching the appearance of
the adjacent natural tooth, especially when a relatively high degree
of translucency is desired. Indications may vary by patients, dentist preference, occlusion, and so forth. MC crowns are more commonly used for multiunit or posterior FDPs.
The following section focuses on the categories of ceramics,
requirements of metal components, bonding of ceramic to metal,
and fabrication of MC prostheses.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which components of ceramics can cause excessive wear of tooth enamel?

CHAPTER 10

• Figure 10-5 Principal phase fields of feldspathic ceramics in the ternary
K2O-Al2O3-SiO2 system.

Ceramic Types
Conventional dental porcelain is a vitreous ceramic based on a
silica (SiO2) network and potash feldspar (K2O•Al2O3•6SiO2) or
soda feldspar (Na2O•Al2O3•6SiO2) or both. The ternary-phase
diagram in Figure 10-5 for the K2O-Al2O3-SiO2 system shows the
approximate composition ranges of feldspathic porcelain products that are used for MC prostheses and for denture teeth. The
feldspars used for dental porcelains are relatively pure and colorless. Thus pigments must be added to produce the hues of natural
teeth or the color appearance of tooth-colored restorative materials that may exist in adjacent teeth. Opacifiers and glass modifiers
to control the fusion temperature, sintering temperature, coefficient of thermal contraction, and solubility are also added. These
ingredients are mixed together and fired to a molten state to complete the necessary chemical reaction (fusing), and then quenched
in water. The resultant product, which is called frit, is then ground
to fine powders for application.

Feldspathic Porcelains
Feldspathic porcelains contain a variety of oxides including an
SiO2 matrix (52 to 65 wt%), Al2O3 (11 to 20 wt%), K2O (10 to
15 wt%), Na2O (4 to 15 wt%), and certain additives (e.g., B2O3,
CeO2, Li2O, TiO2, and Y2O3). These ceramics are called porcelains because they contain a glass matrix and one or more crystal
phases, although the term porcelain traditionally refers to products that were produced from kaolinite (Al2O3•2SiO2•2H2O),
which is a type of clay. The compositions of the veneering (layering) ceramics used for MC restorations (Table 10-1) generally
correspond to those used previously for veneering aluminous porcelain core ceramic (see History of Dental Ceramics section). For
MC porcelains, specific concentrations of soda, potash, and/or
leucite are necessary to reduce the sintering temperature and raise
the thermal expansion coefficient to a level compatible with that
of the metal coping. The opaque porcelains also contain relatively
large amounts of metallic oxide opacifiers to conceal the underlying metal and minimize the thickness of the opaque layer.
Feldspar has the tendency to form crystalline leucite
(K2O•Al2O3•4SiO2) when melted. Leucite is a potassium-aluminum-silicate mineral with a high coefficient of thermal expansion
(20 to 25 × 10–6/K) compared with that of feldspar porcelain

Ceramic-Based Materials

207

(8.6 × 10–6/K). When feldspar is heated at temperatures between
1150 °C and 1530 °C, this material undergoes incongruent melting to form leucite crystals in a liquid glass. Incongruent melting
is the process by which one material melts to form a liquid plus
a different crystalline material. The formation of leucite during
melting controls the thermal expansion of the porcelain during
bonding to a metal coping. Leucite has been added in felspar porcelains to control their coefficients of thermal contraction.
Feldspathic porcelains cannot be classified as glass-ceramics
because crystal formation does not occur through controlled
nucleation, crystal formation, and growth. There are four types of
feldspathic porcelains: (1) ultralow- and low-fusing ceramics, (2)
low-fusing specialty ceramics (shoulder porcelains and wash-coat
ceramics), (3) ceramic stains, and (4) ceramic glazes (autoglaze
and add-on glaze).
The particle type and size of crystal fillers greatly influence the
potential abrasiveness of the ceramic prosthesis. Thus the abrasiveness of the finished surface will depend on the presence or
absence of crystalline fillers. When the opaque porcelain of MC
restorations becomes exposed as a result of the loss of veneer, the
excessive wear of enamel may occur by direct two-body contact
with the opaque porcelain. When one examines the research literature investigating the potential for abrasive damage of enamel,
emphasis should be placed on clinical studies that clearly describe
the preparation history of the outer surface layer.
Veneering ceramics (“porcelains”) for metals have higher
expansion and contraction coefficients than the ceramics used
to veneer alumina or zirconia core ceramics. They should not be
subjected to nonessential repeated firings because this may lead
to devitrification and an increased risk of cloudiness within the
porcelain, in addition to potential changes in coefficient of thermal expansion (αe) and coefficient of thermal contraction (αc).
A proper matching of these thermal properties of the alloy and
porcelain is imperative to reduce the risk for chipping or cracking
of the ceramic veneers, either during cooling from the sintering or
glazing temperatures or at some later time in clinical service.

Ultralow-Fusing Ceramics for Metal-Ceramic Prostheses
In 1992, Duceram LFC (low-fusing ceramic; Dentsply Sirona) was
marketed as an ultralow-fusing ceramic for metal-ceramic prostheses with three unique features: (1) this ceramic is based on a hydrothermal glass in which water is incorporated into the silicate glass
structure to produce nonbridging hydroxyl groups that disrupt the
glass network, thereby decreasing the glass transition temperature,
viscosity, and firing temperature and increasing the coefficient of
thermal expansion (CTE) to allow use as a veneer for certain lowexpansion metals; (2) these types of ceramics are also claimed to be
“self-healing” through a process of forming a 1-μm-thick hydrothermal layer along the ceramic surface; and (3) the extremely small size
of the crystal particles (400 to 500 nm) enhances the opalescence
of the ceramic by reflecting blue light hues from the surface and
yellow hues from the interior of the ceramic. Other ultralow-fusing
ceramics (sintering temperatures below 850 °C) that are now commonly referred to as low-fusing ceramics have been introduced with
veneering glasses that are claimed to be kinder to opposing tooth
enamel, either because they are predominantly a glass phase material or because they contain very small crystal particles.
Most of the ultralow-fusing ceramics have microstructures that
exhibit either a well-distributed dispersion of small crystal particles
or few to no crystals. Wear studies are promising in several cases relative to the enamel wear caused by these ceramics, although not all
ultralow-fusing ceramics exhibit this decreased level of abrasiveness.

208

PA RT I I I

TABLE 10-1

Indirect Restorative Materials

Compositions of Selected Ceramics (wt%)
LOW-FUSING VACUUM PORCELAIN

METAL-CERAMIC PORCELAIN
Low-Fusing

HIP GLASS-CERAMIC

FAP GLASS-CERAMIC

IPS e.max Press
(Based on
Li2O•2SiO2)

IPS e.max Ceram
Veneer Ceramic

Aluminous
Porcelain

Dentin

Enamel

Dentin

Enamel

UltralowFusing

SiO2

35.0

66.5

64.7

59.2

63.5

60–70

57–80

45–70

Al2O3

53.7

13.5

13.9

18.5

18.9

5–10

0–5

5–22

CaO

1.1

2.1

1.8

—

—

1–3.0

—

1–11

Na2O

2.8

4.2

4.8

4.8

5.0

10–15

—

4–13

K2O

4.2

7.1

7.5

11.8

12.3

10–13

0–13

3–9

B2O3

3.2

6.6

7.3

4.6

0.1

0–1.0

—

—

ZnO

—

—

—

0.6

0.1

—

0–8

—

ZrO2

—

—

—

0.4

0.1

0–1.0

0–8

—

BaO, Y2O3

—

—

—

—

—

0–0.2

—

—

SnO2

—

—

—

—

—

0–0.2

—

—

Li2O

—

—

—

—

—

0–1.0

11–19

—

F

—

—

—

—

—

0–1.0

P2O5

—

—

—

—

—

—

0–11

0.5–6.5

Sb2O3

—

—

—

—

—

0–1.0

—

—

CeO2

—

—

—

—

—

0–0.2

—

—

TiO2

—

—

—

—

—

1–3.0

—

—

Pigments/other

—

—

—

—

—

—

0–8/0–10

0–3

Sintering/firing
temperature (°C)

980

980

950

900

900

650–700

945

750

Component

0.1–2.5

FAP, fluorapatite; HIP, hot-isostatically pressed.

Ultralow-fusing ceramics contain less Al2O3 and increased concentrations of CaO, K2O, Li2O, and Na2O (Table 10-1).
Ultralow-fusing dentin and enamel ceramics may be easier to
polish and may yield smoother and less abrasive surfaces than conventional low-fusing and medium-fusing porcelains. Because of
their lower concentration of leucite crystals compared with conventional porcelains, they have lower expansion and contraction
coefficients. Their lower sintering temperatures provide opportunities for use with alloys that have lower fusion temperatures, like
Type 2 and 4 gold alloys, whose compositions must be modified
to ensure proper chemical bonding and matched thermal expansion and contraction coefficients.

Glass Modifiers
The sintering temperature of crystalline silica is too high for use
in veneering aesthetic layers onto dental casting alloys. At such
temperatures, the alloys would melt. In addition, the coefficient of
thermal contraction of crystalline silica is too low for these alloys.
Bonds between silica tetrahedra can be broken by the addition of
alkali metal ions such as sodium, potassium, and calcium. These
ions are associated with the oxygen atoms at the corners of the
tetrahedra and interruption of oxygen-silicon bonds. As a result,
the three-dimensional (3-D) silica network contains many linear
chains of silica tetrahedra that are able to move more easily at

lower temperatures than the atoms that are locked into the 3-D
structure of silica tetrahedra. This ease of movement is responsible
for the increased fluidity (decreased viscosity), lower softening
temperature, and increased thermal expansion conferred by glass
modifiers. However, too high of a modifier concentration reduces
the chemical durability (resistance to attack by water, acids, and
alkalis) of the glass. In addition, if too many tetrahedra are disrupted, the glass may crystallize (devitrify) during porcelain-firing
operations. Hence, a balance between a suitable melting range and
good chemical durability must be maintained.
Boric oxide (B2O3) can behave as a glass modifier to decrease viscosity, lower the softening temperature, and form a glass network.
Because boric oxide forms a separate lattice interspersed with the
silica lattice, this oxide still interrupts the more rigid silica network
and lowers the softening point of the glass. Water, which is not an
intentional addition to dental porcelain, can become a modifier.
The hydronium ion, H3O+, can replace sodium or other metal ions
in a ceramic that contains glass modifiers. This fact accounts for the
phenomenon of “slow crack growth” of ceramics that are exposed
to tensile stresses and moist environments. Water also may account
for the occasional long-term failure of porcelain restorations after
several years of service. The role of alumina (Al2O3) in glass formation is complex. Alumina is not a true glass former but can take
part in the glass network to alter the softening point and viscosity.

CHAPTER 10

TABLE 10-2

Ceramic-Based Materials

209

Classification of Dental Ceramics by
Sintering Temperature
Sintering Temperature
Range

Class

Applications

High fusing

Denture teeth and fully
sintered alumina and
zirconia core ceramics

>1300 °C (>2372 °F)

Medium
fusing

Denture teeth,
presintered zirconia

1101–1300 °C (2013–2372 °F)

Low fusing

Crown and bridge
veneer ceramic

850–1100 °C (1563–2012 °F)

Ultralow
fusing

Crown and bridge
veneer ceramic

<850 °C (<1562 °F)

Manufacturers employ glass modifiers to produce dental porcelains with varying firing temperatures. Dental porcelains are
classified according to their firing temperatures. A typical classification is given in Table 10-2. The medium-fusing and high-fusing
types are used for the production of denture teeth. The low-fusing
and ultralow-fusing porcelains are used as veneering ceramics for
crown and bridge construction. Some of the ultralow-fusing porcelains are used for titanium and titanium alloys because of their
low-contraction coefficients that closely match those of the metals,
and because the low firing temperatures reduce the risk for growth
of the metal oxide. However, some of these ultralow-fusing porcelains contain enough leucite to raise their coefficients of thermal
contraction as high as those of conventional low-fusing porcelains.

Glazes and Stain Ceramics
To ensure adequate chemical durability, a self-glaze of porcelain is
preferred to an add-on glaze. A thin external layer of glassy material is formed during a firing procedure at a temperature and time
that cause localized softening of the glass phase. The add-on glaze
slurry material that is applied to the porcelain surface contains
more glass modifiers and thus has a lower firing temperature. Keep
in mind that higher proportions of glass modifier tend to reduce
the resistance of the applied glazes to leaching by oral fluids.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How is the degree of sintering controlled, and what parameter defines
complete sintering?

The aesthetics of porcelains for MC and ceramic prostheses,
veneers, and denture teeth may be enhanced through the application of stains and glazes to provide a more lifelike appearance. Stains
are simply tinted glazes that are also subject to the same chemical
durability problems. However, most of the currently available glazes
appear to have adequate durability if they are produced in thicknesses of 50 μm or more. To make shaded veneering ceramic to
simulate stain on natural teeth, coloring pigments are first fused
with feldspar, ground to fine powder, and then blended with the
unpigmented powdered frit to provide the proper hue and chroma.
Examples of metallic oxides and their respective color contributions
to porcelain include iron or nickel oxide (brown), copper oxide
(green), titanium oxide (yellowish brown), manganese oxide (lavender), and cobalt oxide (blue). Opacity may be achieved by the addition of cerium oxide, zirconium oxide, titanium oxide, or tin oxide.

• Figure 10-6 Autoglazed veneer ceramic.
One method for ensuring that the applied characterizing stains
will be permanent is to use them internally. Internal staining and
characterization can produce a lifelike result, particularly when
simulated enamel craze lines and other features are built into the
porcelain rather than merely applied to the surface. The disadvantage of internal staining and characterization is that the porcelain must be stripped completely if the color or characterization
is unacceptable.
Autoglazed feldspathic porcelain is stronger than unglazed porcelain. The glaze is effective in sealing surface flaws and reducing
stress concentrations. Figure 10-6 shows an MC crown with a properly fired autoglazed porcelain surface. If the glaze is removed by
grinding, the transverse strength may be only half that of the sample
with the glaze layer intact. However, the results of recent studies
indicate that porcelains with highly polished surfaces have strengths
comparable to those of specimens that were polished and glazed.
This observation is of clinical importance. After the porcelain restoration is cemented in the mouth, the common practice for the dentist is to adjust the occlusion by grinding the surface of the porcelain
with a diamond bur. This procedure weakens the porcelain, with a
roughened surface that can cause increased wear of enamel. There
are commercial finishing and polishing kits available for various
types of ceramics (Chapter 16, Ceramic Restorations). A smoother
surface also reduces the abrasion-causing damage to opposing teeth
or restorations.
Glazing of feldspathic porcelain is believed to eliminate surface flaws and produce a smoother surface. However, an optimum
method of producing the smoothest surface in the shortest time has
not been established. Fine polishing of a roughened surface, followed
by glazing will logically produce a smoother surface than polishing
alone, sandblasting, followed by glazing, or diamond grinding, followed by glazing. However, even though one polishes and/or glazes
a porcelain veneer surface, the surface will either slowly or markedly
break down in the presence of liquids in our everyday diets, including acids such as citric acid and acetic acid. Studies have shown that
these veneers will corrode over time with constant exposure to fluctuations in dietary pH changes coupled with occlusal wear.

Requirements of Metal Component
Many alloys are available to be veneered with low-fusing and
ultralow-fusing porcelains. The compositions of alloys control the castability, bonding ability to porcelain, and the magnitude of stresses that develop in the porcelains during cooling
from the sintering temperature. A list of typical alloy types sold
by one manufacturer is presented in Table 10-3, along with the

210

PA RT I I I

TABLE 10-3

Indirect Restorative Materials

Composition and Properties of Typical Alloys for Metal-Ceramic (PFM) Prostheses
COMPONENTS AND PROPERTIES

Alloy Product

Principal
Elements

Noble Metal
(wt%)

ADA
Class

2% Proof
Stress (MPa)

Elongation
(%)

Hardness
(VHN)

Elastic
Modulus (GPa)

CTE
(25–500 °C)
10-6/K

CTE
(25–600 °C)
10-6/K

Brite Gold

Au-Pt-In

99

HN

230

15.0

100

79

14.8

15.0

Brite GoldXH

Au-Pt

97.9

HN

355–427

11.0

180

107

14.4

14.7

Golden Ceramic

Au-Pt-Pd

97.4

HN

360

12.0

165

64

14.6

14.7

Aquarius Hard

Au-Pt-Pd

97.2

HN

455

12.0

205

88

14.5

14.8

Aquarius

Au-Pt-In

97–98

HN

320

12.0

160

79

14.6

14.8

IPS d.SIGN 98

Au-Pt

98.0

HN

510

8.0

220

80

14.3

14.6

Y

Au-Pt-Pd

96.8

HN

320

12.0

160

81

14.6

14.8

Aquarius XH

Au-Pt-Pd

96.8

HN

510

7.0

220

83

14.1

14.4

Y-2

Au-Pt-Pd

94.6

HN

380

12.0

155

83

15.0

15.1

Y-Lite

Au-Pd-Ag

93.8

HN

500

14.0

225

88

13.9

14.1

Sagittarius

Au-Pd-Pt

95.8

HN

580

10.0

245

94

14.0

14.3

Y-1

Au-Pd-Pt

87.4

HN

340

15.0

185

99

14.8

15.0

IPS d.SIGN 96

Au-Pd-Pt

87.7

HN

405

15.0

214

92

14.3

14;5

IPS d.SIGN 91

Au-Pd-In

90.6

HN

570

31.0

250

136

14.2

14.4

W

Au-Pd-Ag

80.4

HN

455

21.0

220

113

14.2

14.5

W-5

Au-Pd-Ag

78.2

HN

530

20.0

255

118

14.0

14.2

Lodestar

Au-Pd-In

90.0

HN

495

20.0

240

98

14.1

14.3

W-3

Au-Pd-In

88.3

HN

495

17.0

225

128

13.9

14.1

W-2

Au-Pd-Ag

85.3

HN

640

20.0

205

113

14.2

14.6

Evolution Lite

Au-Pd-In-Ag

89.6

HN

375

11.0

280

130

14.2

14.5

Capricorn

Pd-In-Ga-Au

84.1

N

525

21.0

260

101

14.3

14.5

IPS d.SIGN 84

Pd-In-Au-Ag

84.2

N

485

29.0

295

117

13.8

14.0

IPS d.SIGN 67

Pd-Ag-Sn-Au

66.7

N

545

15.0

240

104

13.9

14.2

Spartan Plus

Pd-Cu-Ga-Au

80.8

N

795

20.0

310

97

14.3

14.6

Capricorn 15

Pd-Ag-Au-Pd

66.9

N

490

21

255

101

14.3

14.5

Aries

Pd-Ag-Sn

63.7

N

415

46.0

185

98

14.7

14.8

IPS d.SIGN 59

Pd-Ag-Sn

59.2

N

490

14.0

230

139

14.5

14.8

IPS d.SIGN 53

Pd-Ag-Sn-In

53.8

N

545

13.0

250

132

14.8

14.9

W-1

Pd-Ag-Sn

53.3

N

485

11.0

240

114

15.2

15.4

Calisto CP+

Co-Pd-Cr-Mo

25.0

N

640

10.0

365

180

14.4

14.9

Pisces Plus

Ni-Cr-W

0

PB

600

10.0

280

183

14.1

14.4

IPS d.SIGN 15

Ni-Cr-Mo

0

PB

340

13.0

200

200

13.9

14.2

IPS d.SIGN 30

Co-Cr-Mo

0

PB

520

6.0

375

234

14.5

14.7

ADA, American Dental Association; CTE, coefficient of thermal expansion; HN, high noble; N, noble, PB, predominantly base metal; VHN, Vickers hardness number.

CHAPTER 10

relevant properties of the respective alloy. The reader is referred to
Chapter 9, Requirements of Alloys for Metal-Ceramic Applications, for a description of other systems and the effects and purposes of the constituent metals.
The metal should have a higher melting range, with solidus
temperature greater than the sintering temperature of the ceramic
to prevent sag, creep (see Figure 9-2), or melting of the coping
or framework during sintering and/or glazing. This deformation
does not occur at oral temperatures. In addition, for gold alloys,
a small amount (about 1%) of base-metal elements, such as iron,
indium, and tin, is added to form a surface oxide layer during the
so-called “degassing” treatment. Degassing is a misnomer because
the primary purpose is to produce an adherent metal oxide on
the surface to facilitate bonding to porcelain. Other properties of
alloys of particular importance are the elastic modulus and proof
strength (yield strength), which should be high enough to resist
deformation, and the CTE should be closely matched to those
of the ceramics. These properties, along with the oxide layer, are
discussed in the following section.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What three conditions control the durability of ceramic bonding to an oxidized
metal coping?

Bonding Porcelain to Metal
A durable bond between the ceramic and the metal is the primary requirement for the success of an MC restoration. When the
ceramic powder is brought to sintering temperature, it melts and
wets the metal surfaces. The liquid-phase ceramic then fills the surface roughness of the metal coping. Meanwhile, the liquid-glass
phase reacts with metal oxide and forms an intermediate layer that
adheres strongly to the ceramic and the metal coping. When the
sintered MC prothesis is cooled to room temperature, the bond
between the metal and the ceramic may remain intact or become
separated, depending on the extent of difference between their
CTEs. These phenomena, occurring during the sintering and cooling cycle, constitute the three factors that control the durability
of MC bonding: mechanical interlocking, chemical bonding, and
thermal compatibility.
Recall from the discussion in Chapters 2 (Mechanical Interlocking) and 6 (Mechanisms of Adhesion) that mechanical interlocking
occurs when there is surface roughness. There is some evidence to
support MC bonding through a mechanical interlocking mechanism. One Pd-Ag alloy was found to form metal nodules on the
surface via a creep mechanism. These nodules presumably provide
sufficient mechanical retention for clinical use because this alloy had
been used for many years without noted problems (see Figure 9-3).

CRITICAL QUESTION
What condition is required of cast metals to achieve ionic and/or covalent
bonding to veneering porcelain?

As described, metal oxides work like coupling agents in bonding ceramic to metal. The oxidation behavior of these alloys largely
determines their potential for bonding with porcelain. Research
into the nature of MC adherence has indicated that those alloys
that form adherent oxides during the oxidation cycle also form a
good bond to porcelain, whereas those alloys with poorly adherent
oxides or poor bond of porcelain to the oxide (Figure 10-7) form

Ceramic-Based Materials

211

• Figure 10-7 Bond failure of metal-ceramic post and core prosthesis
poor wetting. Although the thickness of the oxide is thought to
play a role, there is insufficient evidence to support this theory.
Rather, the quality of the oxide and this oxide’s adhesion to the
metal substrate appear to be the most important factors. This porcelain–metal bond is primarily ionic but is likely to have a covalent character as well and is capable of forming on smooth surfaces
where little opportunity exists for mechanical interlocking.
There is a slight difference in the CTE between the metal and
ceramic; usually metal has a higher value than that of the ceramic.
During cooling to room temperature, the dimension of the metal
coping becomes smaller relative to the ceramic, and vice versa.
This means that some adjustment in the dimension at the interface must occur to keep both metal and ceramic bonded together
as they cool down. The metal coping needs to be stretched somehow, and the ceramic needs to be compressed. A possible scenario
is that the ceramic stretches the metal coping as the metal coping
compresses the ceramic. That arrangement results in stresses developed around the interface. For example, a difference in the coefficients of thermal contraction of 1.7 × 10–6/K can produce a shear
stress of 280 MPa in porcelain next to the MC interface when
the porcelain is cooled from 954 °C to room temperature. If the
shear resistance to failure is far less than 280 MPa, these stresses,
resulting from thermal contraction, would likely cause spontaneous bond failure or cracking of the veneering ceramic.
The tensile stresses induced within the restoration by occlusal
forces would be added to the residual thermal stresses. However,
for MC systems that have an average contraction coefficient difference of 0.5 × 10–6/K or less (between 600 °C and room temperature), fracture is unlikely to occur except in cases of extreme stress
concentration or extremely high intraoral forces. These are known
as thermally compatible systems. Many restorations made from metal
and porcelain combinations having contraction coefficient differences between 0.5 and 1.0 × 10–6/K are known to survive for many
years. Most patients generate typical bite forces of 400 to 800 N
between molar teeth and much lower forces between premolars
and between anterior teeth. Thus a rather small number of patients
will have bite force capabilities that are likely to cause fracture of
MC crowns or bridges even when residual thermal incompatibility
stresses are present. As a general rule, lower forces are generated by
younger children, female patients, a more closed bite, occlusion
between natural teeth, a denture, and fixed partial dentures.
The general term compatibility has been used in ISO 96931:2012 Dentistry—Compatibility Testing—Part 1: MC systems,
which describe a debonding/crack-initiation strength test, to identify the ability of the MC system to demonstrate both acceptable

212

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

adhesion of ceramic to metal oxide and freedom from the crack
formation associated with stresses caused by thermal expansion
and contraction differences.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why should the difference in CTEs between metal coping and respective
veneering ceramic be small?

Other equally important properties of MC systems are the proportional limit (or yield strength) and elastic modulus of the metal
coping. Alloys with a high modulus will also reduce the stress distribution to the ceramic from occlusion. A high proportional limit
also prevents the metal coping from deforming plastically.
Various tests have been advocated for measuring the bond
strength; however, the strength values obtained may not represent
the true strength of the bond. Depending on the difference in
CTEs of the metal and the ceramic, residual stress evolves during
cooling. If a residual compressive stress evolves in the porcelain
adjacent to the interfacial region, a higher bond-strength value
will result, assuming that a valid test is used to produce interfacial
fracture. A fracture that initiates away from the interface does not
necessarily prove that the interfacial bond strength is greater than
the cohesive strength of either the metal or the ceramic. This fracture may merely be caused by misalignment of loading or unintended stress distributions such that the maximum tensile or shear
stresses do not occur in the interfacial region, or it may result from
surface flaws that favor separation away from the interface.
For an MC bond to be maintained over time, there should be
minimal residual shear stresses at the porcelain after cooling from
the sintering temperature. An unfavorable stress distribution during
the cooling process can result in immediate or delayed fracture of the
porcelain. Thus for a successful MC restoration to be realized, both a
strong interfacial bond and thermal compatibility are required.

Fabrication of Metal-Ceramic Prostheses
The fabrication of MC prostheses involves a two-step process: fabrication of the metal substructure and firing of veneering ceramic.
The metal substructures are constructed using the lost wax technique, computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing
(CAD-CAM), or 3-D printing, which is followed by finishing,
polishing, and oxidation to achieve a surface oxide layer. The
application of the ceramic veneer can be achieved through manual
condensation or by vacuum pressing ceramic ingots.

Manual Porcelain Condensation
Ceramic for veneering MC prostheses, as well as for other applications, is supplied as a fine powder that is designed to be mixed
with water or another vehicle and condensed into the desired
form. The powder particles are of a particular size distribution
to produce the most densely packed porcelain when properly
condensed. Proper and thorough condensation is also crucial in
obtaining dense packing of the powder particles. Dense packing
lowers firing shrinkage and reduces porosity in the fired ceramic.
This condensation may be achieved by various methods, including
the vibration, spatulation, and brush techniques.
Firing Procedure
The thermochemical reactions between components of the
ceramic are virtually completed during the original manufacturing process of making frits. Thus the purpose of firing is to sinter

the ceramic particles together for a specific time and temperature
combination to form the prosthesis. For low-fusing porcelain, the
condensed porcelain mass is placed in front of or below the muffle
of a preheated furnace at approximately 650 °C. This preheating
procedure permits the remaining water in the condensed ceramic
mass to dissipate. Placement of the condensed mass directly into
even a moderately warm furnace results in a rapid production of
steam, thereby introducing voids or fracturing large sections of
the veneer. After preheating for approximately 5 minutes, the porcelain is placed into the furnace, and the firing cycle is initiated.
At the initial firing temperature, the voids are occupied by the
atmosphere of the furnace. As sintering of the particles begins, the
porcelain particles fuse at their points of contact, and the structure
shrinks and densifies. As the temperature is raised, the sintered
glass gradually flows to fill up the air spaces. Air can still be trapped
because the fused mass is too viscous to allow all the air to escape.
An aid in the reduction of porosity in dental porcelain is vacuum
firing. Sintering is complete when the structure achieves 100% of
the theoretical density. However, this is unlikely to occur even in
the presence of a vacuum because the possibility that all pores will
be eliminated under typical dental sintering conditions is remote.
A few bubbles are present, but they are markedly smaller than the
ones obtained with the usual air-firing method. At a condition of
95% to 99% theoretical density, the dental veneering ceramic is
said to be mature or fully sintered.
In some cases, multiple firings are necessary to fabricate a prosthesis, such as the application of a stain layer for shade adjustment
or for characterization with stain lines or fine cracks. Several chemical reactions occur over time at porcelain-firing temperatures, and
of particular importance are increases in the concentration of crystalline leucite. The presence of leucite content can alter the coefficient of thermal contraction of the porcelain. Some porcelains
undergo an increase in leucite crystals after multiple firings that
will increase their CTE. If the expansion coefficient increases above
that of the metal, the expansion mismatch between the porcelain
and the metal can produce stresses during cooling that are enough
to cause immediate or delayed crack formation in the porcelain.

Cooling
The proper cooling of a porcelain restoration from firing temperature to room temperature is the subject of considerable importance. The catastrophic fracture of glass that has been subjected to
sudden changes in temperature is a sufficiently familiar experience
that most clinicians are cautious about exposing dental porcelain
to rapid cooling (thermal shock) after firing. The cooling of dental porcelain, however, is a complex matter, particularly when the
porcelain is bonded to a metallic substrate. Multiple firings of an
MC restoration can cause the coefficient of thermal contraction of
the porcelain to increase and can actually make the ceramic more
likely to crack or craze because of tensile stress development.
The MC restoration that is shown schematically in Figure 10-4
has a facial metal thickness of 0.3 to 0.5 mm. This is veneered
with opaque porcelain approximately 0.3 mm in thickness. The
body porcelain is about 1-mm thick. Because a ductile metal is
used as an inner core of an MC crown, cracks will not propagate
in the metal, but they can progress through the veneering ceramic
or within the interfacial region. With proper design and physical
properties of the porcelain and metal, the porcelain is reinforced
so that brittle fracture of the veneer can be avoided or at least
minimized. Although most MC restorations involve cast metal
copings, several novel noncast approaches (electrodeposition,
milling, swaging, and burnishing) for the fabrication of metal

CHAPTER 10

substructures have been developed in recent years. The fracture
resistance of MC prostheses made from these core metals is much
less reliable compared with those made from traditional cast metal
copings and frameworks.

Ceramic-Ceramic or All-Ceramic Systems
Recent developments in ceramic products with improved fracture
resistance, advanced CAD-CAM technology, and excellent aesthetic
capability have led to a significant increase in the use of ceramicceramic or all-ceramic products. Ceramic crowns and bridges have
been in widespread use since the beginning of the 21st century. One
of the first hot-isostatically pressed (HIP) core ceramics was IPS
Empress, a leucite-based glass-ceramic. Because of this material’s relatively low flexure strength and fracture toughness, this glass-ceramic
was limited to anterior single-unit restorations. Other ceramics that
were limited to single-unit restorations were Vitadur N aluminous
porcelain; Cerestore magnesia-alumina shrink-free ceramic; and
Dicor, a tetrasilicic-fluormica-based glass-ceramic. Although these
materials had reasonably good success rates for a few years, their
limitations slowly, but surely, led to the development of stronger and
tougher ceramics that allowed for a broader range of uses.

Glass-Ceramics
A glass-ceramic is a material that is formed into the desired shape
as a glass, then subjected to a heat treatment to induce partial
devitrification (i.e., loss of glassy structure by crystallization of the
glass). The crystalline particles, needles, or plates formed during
this heat-treatment process interrupt the propagation of cracks in
the material when an intraoral force is applied, thereby promoting increased strength and toughness. The use of glass-ceramics
in dentistry was first proposed by MacCulloch in 1968. He used
a continuous glass-molding process to produce denture teeth. He
also suggested that fabricating crowns and inlays by centrifugal
casting of molten glass was possible.
The first commercially available castable ceramic material for
dental use, Dicor, was developed by Corning Glass Works and
marketed by Dentsply International. Dicor was a castable glass
that contained 55 vol% of tetrasilicic fluormica (KMg2.5Si4O10F2)
and was formed into an inlay, facial veneer, or full-crown restoration by a lost wax casting process similar to that employed for
metals. This product was derived from the quaternary ceramic
system, K2O-MgF2-MgO-SiO2. Besides this material’s relatively
low flexure strength (110 to 172 MPa) and low fracture toughness
(1.6 to 2.1 MPa•m1/2), the original cast form was colorless, and
prostheses needed to be colored through the application of a thin
layer of shading porcelain. Subsequent products were provided as
dark and light shades of machinable glass-ceramic (MGC). The
flexure strength of Dicor MGC decreased by up to 88% after the
tensile surface was ground.
After the glass casting core or coping was recovered from the
casting investment, the glass was sandblasted to remove residual
casting investment, and the sprues were gently cut away. The
glass was then covered by a protective “embedment” material and
subjected to a heat treatment that caused microscopic plate-like
crystals of tetrasilicic fluormica to grow within the glass matrix.
This crystal nucleation and crystal growth process is called ceramming. Once the glass was cerammed, the glass was then fit on the
prepared dies, ground as necessary, and coated with veneering
porcelain to match the shape and appearance of adjacent teeth.
Dicor glass-ceramic was capable of producing remarkably good

Ceramic-Based Materials

213

aesthetics, perhaps because of the “chameleon” effect, where part
of the color of the restoration was picked up from the adjacent
teeth and from the tinted cements used for luting the restorations.
When used for posterior crowns, the Dicor glass-ceramic crowns
were more susceptible to fracture than anterior crowns.
More recently, glass-ceramics based on leucite, lithia disilicate,
and hydroxyapatite have been used. These ceramics are available
as powders or as solid blocks that can be machined through CADCAM processes or hot-pressed either as a core ceramic or as a
veneering ceramic. The condensation and processing of ceramic
powders are described in a previous section.

Hot-Isostatically Pressed Glass-Ceramics
Veneered leucite-based glass-ceramic core restorations are indicated
for anterior veneers and crowns and premolar inlays, onlays, and
crowns. Hot-pressed leucite-containing glass-ceramics have been
used for many years. The technology of hot-pressing leucite-based
and lithia-disilicate–based glass-ceramics is well established, and this
technology has recently been applied to the hot-pressing of veneer
ceramics on metals and zirconia core ceramics. The most widely
used leucite-based products are IPS Empress (Ivoclar Vivadent),
Cerpress SL (Leach and Dillon), Finesse (DENTSPLY Ceramco),
and IPS e.max CAD (Ivoclar Vivadent). These glass-ceramics contain approximately 35 vol% of leucite (K2O•Al2O3•4SiO2) crystals. The glass-matrix layering ceramic for these core materials also
contains leucite. These glass-ceramics have relatively low flexure
strength (≤112 MPa) and fracture toughness (1.3 MPa•m1/2), so
they are not recommended for molar crowns or bridges. A partial
listing of HIP core ceramics is given in Table 10-4.
IPS Empress 2 (Ivoclar Vivadent), IPS Eris (Ivoclar Vivadent),
and Optec OPC 3G (Pentron Laboratory Technologies) contain
approximately 65 to 70 vol% of lithia disilicate (Li2O•2SiO2) as the
principal crystal phase (Table 10-1). The lithia disilicate materials
that are used as glass-ceramics have a narrow sintering range, which
makes the processing of ceramic prostheses very technique sensitive. Figure 10-8 shows a schematic cross-section of an all-ceramic
crown made with a lithia disilicate core ceramic. This glass-ceramic
is composed of approximately 70 vol% of lithia disilicate and 30
vol% glass. This glass base contains at least 4% ZrO2, which could
account for this material’s improved strength. This ceramic is fairly
translucent but is somewhat opaquer (Figure 10-9) and a stronger core ceramic than the leucite-based glass-ceramic (Empress).
The mean flexural strength of lithia disilicate is approximately 350
MPa compared with the 112 MPa strength of leucite-based glassceramics. is strength and a fracture toughness of 3.3 MPa•m1/2
for lithia-disilicate–based glass-ceramics are generally sufficient
for most anterior and posterior crowns and for anterior three-unit
bridges even though the flexural strength and fracture toughness of
their layering ceramics are substantially lower. Although the core
ceramic fracture resistance is moderately high, veneered prostheses have been reported to be susceptible to chipping, which may
require replacement or recontouring of the affected prostheses.
Examples of cracking and chipping of these prostheses are shown
in Figures 10-10, 10-11, and 10-12. A follow-up material to lithia
disilicate is lithia silicate material, with minimal change to the
physical properties. The latest iteration of these silicate glasses is the
addition of lithia metasilicate to the lithia disilicate crystals with
the inclusion of 10% ZrO2 in the glass matrix.
Hot-pressed ceramics (IPS Empress, IPS Empress 2, Finesse
All-Ceramic, and OPC-3G) are made by creating a wax pattern, which is invested. Similar to the lost wax technique, this

214

PA RT I I I

TABLE 10-4

Indirect Restorative Materials

Pressable Core Ceramics and Associated Veneering Ceramics for All-Ceramic Prostheses

Core Ceramic

Veneering Ceramic

Indications

Manufacturer

Authentic

Authentic

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior crown

Ceramay

Carrara Press Core

Carrara Vincent

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior crown

Elephant

Carrara Press Inlay

Carrara Vincent

Inlay

Elephant

Cergogold

Duceragold

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior crown

Degussa

Cerpress

Sensation SL

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior and posterior crown

Dentagold

Cerapress

Creation LF

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior crown

Girrbach

Empress 2

Eris, e.max Ceram

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior and posterior crown/anterior FDP

Ivoclar Vivadent

e.max Press

e.max Ceram

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior and posterior crown/anterior FDP

Ivoclar Vivadent

Evopress

Evolution

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior crown

Wegold

Finesse All Ceramic

Finesse

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior crown

DENTSPLY Ceramco

Fortress Pressable

—

—

Mirage Dental

Magic Coating Caps
Schicht-Pressing

Magic Ceram 2

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior crown

D.T.S.
Denta TechnoStore

Magic Easy Press
Colorier-Pressing

—

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior crown

D.T.S.
Denta TechnoStore

Nuance Presskeramik

Nuance 750

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior crown

Schutz Dental Group

Optec OPC
Low Wear

Optec OPC
Low wear

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior and posterior crown

Jeneric Pentron

Optec OPC 3G

Optec OPC 3G
Porcelain

Veneer/inlay/onlay/crown/anterior FPD

Jeneric Pentron

Trendpress

Trendkeramik LFC

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior crown

Binder Dental

PLATINApress

Platina M

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior crown

Heimerle+Meule

Vision Esthetic

Vision Esthetic

Veneer/inlay/onlay/anterior crown

Wohlwend

VITAPress

VITA Omega 900

Veneer/inlay/onlay

Vident

Adapted from Kappert HF, Krah MK: Keramiken—eine Übersicht, Quintessenz Zahntech 27(6):668–704, 2001.

investment is heated and injected under pressure into the investment mold. This technique can also be used to veneer MC prostheses, as mentioned earlier.

Fluorapatite Glass-Ceramic
Nano-fluorapatite glass-ceramic veneer, such as e.max Ceram
(Table 10-1), has a relatively low CTE (~9.5 × 10–6/K) and is
matched to that of lithia disilicate glass-ceramic core material
and to some alumina and zirconia ceramics. Thus, because of the
higher expansion coefficients of conventional feldspathic porcelain veneers, they cannot be used on lithia disilicate core frameworks. However, the fluorapatite-based layering glass-ceramics are
thermally compatible with these core glass-ceramics. Because of
their sufficiently high-volume fraction of glass-matrix phase, these
ceramics can be acid-etched and bonded to resin cement using
well-established procedures.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why do zirconia-based ceramics require a stabilizer?

Zirconia-Based Ceramics
Zirconia or zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) is a white crystalline oxide of
zirconium that has an extremely low thermal conductivity, about
20% as high as that of alumina (Al2O3). Zirconia is chemically
inert and highly corrosion resistant and exhibits unique mechanical and electrical properties that make this material extremely useful in such applications as heat insulators, oxygen sensors, and
fuel cells. The first use of zirconia for medical purposes was made
in 1969 in orthopedics as a new material for femoral heads on
total hip replacements. Zirconia has been used in dentistry for
crown and bridge applications since 2004, with the development
of CAD-CAM systems. Dental zirconia should not be confused
with cubic zirconia or zircon. Zircon is a naturally occurring gemstone based on zirconium silicate (ZrSiO4), and cubic zirconia is a
cubic crystalline form of zirconia. Both zircon and cubic zirconia
are used as diamond simulants.
Pure ZrO2 powder has a monoclinic crystal structure at room
temperature and transforms to tetragonal between 1167 and
2367 °C, and then cubic zirconia at temperatures above 2367 °C.
The transition from tetragonal to monoclinic phase results in a

CHAPTER 10

Ceramic-Based Materials

215

• Figure 10-11 Chipping of veneer ceramic on the pontic of a three-unit
bridge made with a lithia-disilicate–based glass-ceramic core.

• Figure 10-8 Cross-sectional illustration of cemented Empress 2 ceramic crown with a lithia-disilicate–based ceramic core.

• Figure 10-12 Chipped veneer ceramic on a pontic of a bridge made
with a lithia-disilicate–based core ceramic. Also note the crack in the distal
area of the posterior crown.

• Figure 10-9 A three-unit ceramic posterior fixed dental prothesis (tooth
numbers 19–21; Fédération Dentaire Internationale tooth numbers 34 to
36) produced with a lithia-disilicate–based core ceramic.

3% to 5% volume increase (Figure 10-13), which produces microcracks in bulk zirconia samples and a reduction in strength and
toughness. Under this condition, pure zirconia would be useless
for dental restorative applications. However, the addition of some
metallic oxides to zirconia has been found to keep the tetragonal
phase from transforming into the monoclinic phase as zirconia
cools to room temperature, preventing the development of microcracks and preserving the mechanical properties of the tetragonal

• Figure 10-10 Cracking and fracture of a crown. A, Crack (black arrow) in crown of a three-unit bridge
made with a lithia-disilicate–based glass-ceramic core. B, Fracture of the crown shown.

216

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

Zirconium
Oxygen

c

c

b

a
Tetragonal

b
a
Monoclinic

• Figure 10-13 Tetragonal and monoclinic unit cell structures.

phase. The process is called doping. The types of oxide include
magnesia (MgO), lime (CaO), yttria (Y2O3), and ceria (Ce2O3).
The oxide-doped zirconia is termed stabilized zirconia. Another
possibility for stabilizing the high-temperature tetragonal phase
at room temperature is to keep the crystal size to less than 10 nm
during cooling.

2.1 MPa•m1/2, and the fracture toughness of tetragonal 3Y-TZP is
approximately 8 to 10.3 MPa•m1/2. This improvement was identified to have been caused by a tetragonal-to-monoclinic transformation, which will be discussed in the following section.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the differences among fully stabilized zirconia (FSZ), partially
stabilized zirconia (PSZ), and tetragonal zirconia polycrystal (TZP)?

What microstructural changes occur in 3Y-TZP ceramic at the tip of cracks in
the presence of tensile stress?
Through what mechanism does transformation toughening increase the
resistance of yttria-stabilized zirconia to fracture?

Stabilized Zirconia
If a larger concentration of stabilizer (i.e., more than 8 mol%
yttria) is added, the zirconia becomes all cubic phase and is called
fully stabilized zirconia (FSZ), which is the component of cubic
zirconia and devices such as oxygen sensors and fuel cells. The
increase in volume does not occur in FSZ. The most common
stabilizer for dental applications is yttria in the quantities of 3
to 5 mol%. At that concentration, the oxide-doped zirconia is
known as partially stabilized zirconia (PSZ) or tetragonal zirconia polycrystal (TZP), depending on the microstructure. The
PSZ consists of nanosized metastable tetragonal particles that
have precipitated out in a cubic phase matrix approximately
50 μm in grain size during tempering of cooling cycle. Metastable tetragonal crystallites below a critical size (far below 1 μm)
can be maintained in this form in a densely sintered structure
down to room temperature. These crystallites allow for sintering a highly dense structure termed TZP, with each single crystallite that is almost 100% metastable tetragonal crystallites at
room temperature. Normally, the material is designated by the
quantity of stabilizer before the abbreviation of the stabilizer,
and then the type of microstructure. Therefore 3Y-TZP refers
to 3 mol% Y2O3 tetragonal zirconia polycrystal, and 5Y-PSZ
has 5 mol% Y2O3 partially stabilized zirconia. Magnesia has also
been used to produce an Mg-PSZ core ceramic (ZirMagnum,
Cad.esthetics AB, Skellefteå, Sweden). Ceria is used as a stabilizer
in a Ce-TZP/Al2O3 core ceramic (KZR-CAD NANOZR, Yamakin Co. Ltd., Osaka, Japan).
High strengths were discovered to correlate with a high tetragonal phase content, whereas a high amount of monoclinic phase
leads to low strengths. For example, the fracture toughness of a
92% dense nondoped monoclinic zirconia has been reported to be

Transformation Toughening
The structural stabilization of zirconia by yttria results in a significant proportion of metastable tetragonal phase. By controlling
the composition, particle size, and temperature-versus-time cycle,
zirconia can be densified by sintering at a high temperature, and
the tetragonal structure can be maintained as individual grains
(i.e., ZTP) or precipitates (i.e., PSZ), as the structure is cooled
to room temperature. The tetragonal phase is retained in a metastable state at room temperature by internal stress and can transform under certain conditions to a stable monoclinic phase with a
corresponding volume increase. When sufficient stress develops in
the structure, and a crack begins to propagate, causing the metastable tetragonal crystals (grains) or precipitates next to the crack
tip to release the internal stress, the metastable tetragonal phases
transform to the stable monoclinic form. In this process, a 3 vol%
expansion of the ZrO2 crystals or precipitates occurs that places
the crack under a state of compressive stress (Figure 10-14), and
crack progression is arrested. To advance this crack further, additional tensile stress would be required. This phenomenon increases
the flexural and tensile fracture resistance of stabilized zirconia
prostheses and, presumably, the survival probabilities of zirconiabased restorations and is therefore called transformation toughening. Because of this strengthening and toughening mechanism,
the yttria-stabilized zirconia ceramic is sometimes referred to as
ceramic steel. Figure 10-15 shows a cross-sectional view of a Lava
crown with a Y-TZP product.
The energy exerted on the surface by grinding may exhibit
surface toughening in principle through the tetragonal-to-monoclinic phase transformation; excessive grinding by instruments
with coarse abrasives or large flutes is not recommended by most

CRITICAL QUESTION

CHAPTER 10

Ceramic-Based Materials

217

• Figure 10-14 Schematic illustration of transformation toughening of a yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia
polycrystal (Y-TZP) ceramic.

• Figure 10-15 Cross-section of a veneered crown with Lava zirconiabased core. (Courtesy 3M ESPE, St. Paul, MN.)

zirconia suppliers because deep flaws may offset any advantage
presented by localized compressive stresses. A regeneration heat
treatment of machined or superficially ground Y-TZP at 900 °C
for 1 hour or less at 900 to 1000 °C converts the monoclinic phase
within the surface back to the tetragonal phase. Thus, if veneer firing occurs after a grinding procedure, the thermal treatment can
induce the reverse transformation of monoclinic to the tetragonal
phase in the ground areas of the zirconia structure.
The volume increase in this case is constrained if the zirconia crystals are sufficiently small and the microstructure is strong
enough to resist the resulting stresses. This material is extremely
strong (flexural strength, ≈ 900 MPa) and tough (fracture toughness, KIc, ranges from 8 to 10.3 MP∙m1/2). Many Y-TZP products
are available in dentistry for CAD-CAM processing. These Y-TZP
products fall into three groups: (1) to be milled in the green (compacted) state, (2) to be milled in a partially sintered state, and (3)
to be milled in the fully sintered state.

Monolithic Zirconia
One approach to reducing the fracture susceptibility of ceramic
restorations associated with weaker veneer is to use only core
ceramics to make the entire restoration. Table 10-5 lists some
properties of several core ceramics including a Y-TZP product

and the corresponding veneering ceramic. This method is especially useful in the most posterior areas of molar crowns where
high occlusal clenching forces or parafunctional forces are applied.
Although the fracture resistance of all-zirconia crowns is exceptionally high, there is the potential for undue wear of opposing
enamel. Clinical studies have confirmed that properly polished
monolithic zirconia does not cause excessive wear of opposing
enamel. This is in contrast to glazed monolithic zirconia, which
has been shown to cause excessive wear of enamel, especially after
the glaze has worn off. Two other disadvantages of an all-zirconia
crown are the difficulty in adjusting occlusion when significant
premature contacts are present and the cutting difficulty and heat
generated in removing defective crowns or when making an endodontic access opening with diamond burs.
Another disadvantage of monolithic zirconia is the opaque
nature of this material. To offset this lack of translucency, manufacturers increased the yttria content with the production of 4Y-PSZ
and 5Y-PSZ, where the tetragonal phase is lowered to about 75%
and 50%, respectively, with the balance as cubic phases. With
increase of cubic phase and their larger grain size, these zirconia
materials exhibit greater translucency, thereby improving asthetics. However, reducing the volume of the tetragonal phase leads
to less transformation toughening and lower strength and fracture
toughness of the zirconia. These translucent zirconia ceramics have
strengths similar to lithia disilicate and are therefore indicated for
single-unit restorations only.

Fracture Strength of Zirconia
For zirconia, the fracture toughness tends to increase with
increasing grain size. Therefore the influence of grain size on
transformation toughening is contrary to the increase in fracture
strength for the small grain sizes seen in many other materials.
One study of the influence of grain size on three-point bending strength and Vickers fracture toughness revealed that the
fracture strength increases linearly for 3Y-TZP from 650 MPa
for a 0.9-μm grain size up to 1000 MPa for a critical grain size
of 1.4 μm, after which this decreases to 750 MPa for a mean
grain size of 1.8 μm. The change in fracture strength is mainly

218

PA RT I I I

TABLE 10-5

Indirect Restorative Materials

Properties of Three Types of Core Ceramics and a Veneering Ceramic for All-Ceramic Prostheses
PRINCIPAL CRYSTAL FORM

Property

Leucite

Property

Zirconia (Y-TZP)

35

70

≥97.5 (may also include crystalline HfO2,
Al2O3, Na2O, SiO2, and Fe2O3, etc.)

85–112

215–400

900

85–110

1.3–1.7

2.2–3.3

8–10.3

0.75–1.0

5.9

6.3

8.8–11.8

4.8–5.4

15.0–15.4

9.7–10.6

10.0–11.0

9.8

65–86

95–103

210

65

100–200

30–50

30

10–20

Crystallinity (vol%)
Flexural strength (MPa)
1/2

Fracture toughness (MPa∙m )
Vickers hardness (GPa)
–6

Expansion coefficient (10 /K)
Elastic modulus (GPa)
*

2

Chemical durability (μg/cm )

Veneering Porcelain for Y-TZP

Y-TZP, yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia polycrystal.
*International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 6872.

governed by the change in fracture toughness for the grain size
between 0.9 and 1.8 μm. However, this relationship probably
does not apply to nanocrystalline (~100-nm grain size) zirconia
used in dentistry because the mean grain size is much smaller
than the extrinsic defects, such as cracks caused by grinding. Thus
the dependence of fracture strength on grain size should be small
for dental CAD-CAM zirconia. The decrease in strength caused
by very large grain sizes is likely caused by premature transformation, which causes microcracking. Kosmač et al. reported
that grinding reduced the monoclinic content and the flexural
strength of fine-grained zirconia, but grinding did not affect the
flexural strength of coarse-grained zirconia. Curtis et al. reported
that grinding with coarse-grit burs decreased the flexural strength
of zirconia, but grinding with fine-grit burs did not cause a statistically significant change. Other studies listed in the reference
section may present conflicting results because of differences in
the initial microstructure, composition, particle-size distribution,
maximum flaw sizes, and flaw-size distribution.

Hydrothermal Degradation
The long-term performance of Y-TZP may be compromised by this
material’s susceptibility to hydrothermal degradation. Although
hydrothermal effects have been generally reported between 200
and 400 °C, longer exposure times at oral temperatures may also
degrade zirconia, resulting in increased surface roughness, fragmented grains, and microcracks. The degradation process is initiated by a transformation of the surface to the monoclinic phase,
which spreads through the surface grains and into adjacent grains
by stresses that develop during this process. The controlling
mechanism is unknown, although OH– groups are thought to be
responsible for breaking the atomic bonds at the surface, which
produces residual stresses and the initial transformation from the
tetragonal to monoclinic phase.

Glass-Infiltrated Core Ceramics
To minimize sintering shrinkage and to ensure adequate fit of
ceramic prostheses, three glass-infiltrated core ceramic systems
have been developed, one based on partially sintered alumina, one
based on a magnesia-alumina spinel (MgAl2O4), and one with a
zirconia-alumina core. Each of these partially sintered ceramics

• Figure 10-16 Cross-sectional illustration of an In-Ceram crown with a
glass-infiltrated core ceramic.

can be infiltrated with a lanthanum glass without any significant
dimensional change.
VITA In-Ceram Alumina contains approximately 85 vol% of
alumina. The partially sintered framework is formed by a slipcasting process, which produces dense packing of particles against
a porous die. After firing at 1120 °C for 10 hours or more, a partially sintered structure is formed. This porous core ceramic framework is then infused with molten lanthanum glass. A schematic
illustration of a cross-section of an In-Ceram Alumina crown is
shown in Figure 10-16.
The same type of process can also be applied to In-Ceram Spinel (ICS), which is a magnesia alumina spinel (MgAl2O4) core
ceramic, and In-Ceram Zirconia. After glass infiltration, InCeram Spinel ceramic is more translucent than In-Ceram Alumina or In-Ceram Zirconia, but the mean strength is significantly
lower (~350 MPa vs. ~600 MPa). The mean flexure strength of

CHAPTER 10

Ceramic-Based Materials

219

In-Ceram Zirconia (~620 MPa) is only slightly greater than that
of In-Ceram Alumina.
In-Ceram Zirconia, a zirconia-toughened alumina (ZTA)
material, is not made from a pure zirconia core but, rather, a
combination of 62 wt% alumina, 20 wt% zirconia, and ~18 wt%
infiltrated glass. In-Ceram Zirconia is indicated primarily for
crown copings and three-unit anterior and posterior frameworks
when in a glass-infused form. Because there is no shrinkage associated with this process, the marginal adaptation is expected to be
comparable to that of the hot-pressing method. As with 3Y-TZP
zirconia, ZTA is subject to transformation toughening with
conversion from tetragonal to monoclinic phases in areas where
stress is induced. The result of this process is that the strength
of ZTA is doubled, and the toughness is increased two to four
times. The properties of alumina, ZTA, and 3Y-TZP are summarized in Table 10-6. The ZTA properties are based on an 85%
alumina-15% zirconia product (ZTA-96, Astro Met, Inc., Cincinnati, OH).

using a mechanical profiling device; then a computer converts the
coordinates of the die surface into a digital database. An oversized
die is then produced onto which pure alumina is dry-pressed. The
oversize green alumina body is then sintered, and the resulting
shrinkage yields the desired size and shape onto which a feldspathic porcelain veneer is applied and sintered. The Procera AllCeram core is more translucent than In-Ceram Zirconia and has
comparable strength (620–700 MPa). Because alumina cannot be
acid-etched to produce micromechanical retention, the surface is
sandblasted with silica-coated alumina particles by a Rocatec system (3M ESPE Minneapolis, MN), which is required to ensure
sufficient resin bonding. Figure 10-17, A shows a fractured threeunit alumina-based bridge whose retentive flanges were dimpled
to promote micromechanical bonding. The fracture surface in
Figure 10-17, B shows a relatively large void that may have contributed to the fracture.

Alumina Core Ceramic

Bonding to prosthetic ceramics is important for three reasons:
(1) resin-based composite cements are believed to increase the
retention of all-ceramic prostheses, (2) resin-based composite
cements are believed to increase the fracture resistance and survivability of ceramic restorations, and (3) resin-based composite

Procera AllCeram (Nobel Biocare) is an alumina-core ceramic that
is indicated for anterior and posterior crowns. To produce these
crowns, a die is first produced from an impression and digitized

TABLE 10-6

Bonding of Resin to Dental Ceramics

Physical Properties of Alumina, Zirconia-Toughened Alumina, and 3Y-TZP

Property

Alumina

Zirconia-Toughened Alumina (ZTA)

Zirconia (Y-TZP)

3

3.95

4.10

6.07

Vickers hardness (VHN; GPa)

1175; 11.5

1750; 17.2

1300; 12.8

Flexural strength (MPa)

330

760

≥900

Average grain size (µm)

1–5

1.5

≤0.5

Modulus of elasticity (GPa)

300

310

200

0.25

0.26

0.30

3.5

5–7

9–13

CTE (10 /K)

8.1

8.1

10.3

Thermal conductivity (W/m∙K)

24

21

2.5–2.8

Density (g/cm )

Poisson’s ratio
1/2

Fracture toughness (MPa∙m )
–6

CTE, coefficient of thermal expansion; 3Y-TZP, 3 mol% Y2O3 tetragonal zirconia polycrystal; Y-TZP, yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia polycrystal.

• Figure 10-17 Fractured connector of a three-unit resin-bonded bridge made with an alumina core ceramic. A, Dimples on the retaining flange indicating poor wetting of the adhesive. B, A void within the
connector to the other flange.

220

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

is the material of choice for repair of chipped or fractured core or
veneer ceramic. However, silane-based coupling does not bond
chemically to all ceramics. For example, as previously shown
in Figure 10-17, the framework of the fractured resin-bonded
bridge made with an alumina framework could not be etched.
The dimpled area on one of the retained flanges of the bridge
suggests that macromechanical bonding to the resin cement had
been chosen. The clean separation of this framework from the
resin-based cement indicates inadequate bonding. In addition,
examination of the fractured flange indicates the presence of
a large void that may have contributed to the fracture of the
connector.
The mechanism of silane-based primer bonding to a silica network of silica-based ceramics is well known. In addition, abrasive
blasting and acid-etching of the glass matrix of these ceramics create surface irregularities that can further enhance the retention of
the resin cement. The penetration of the adhesive resin into the
macroscopic irregularities, combined with chemical bonding, may
also inhibit water access to the ceramic surface, thereby enhancing
the durability of bonded ceramic prostheses. Furthermore, acidetching can blunt the tips of microcracks within the ceramic surface. This blunting process reduces the stress concentration at the
crack tips. If any voids are trapped within the interface between
the crown and cement in the occlusal area, occlusal loads above
this site can generate tensile stresses in the ceramic that may cause
crack formation or fracture.
Silane primers or coupling agents have dual functionality,
including an unsaturated group for polymerizing to adhesive resins
and resin-based composites and methoxy groups (–OCH3) that are
hydrolyzed to silanols (Si–OH) for bonding to inorganics such as
silica-based ceramics or metal oxide substrates through the formation of siloxane (–Si–O–Si–) bonds or (–Si–O–M–) bonds on other
metal oxide substrates. Silane primers provide covalent bonds that
promote adhesion at the interface between polymers and hydrolytically stable silica-based substrates, assuming that the substrate is free
of contaminants. Figure 10-18 shows a schematic illustration of the
bonding stage of silane primer or adhesive to a silica-based ceramic.
The reaction of silanes with silica-based ceramics involves four
stages: hydrolysis, condensation, hydrogen bonding, and bond
formation. After hydrolysis of the methoxy groups, condensation
to oligomers occurs, and the oligomers then hydrogen bond with
–OH groups of the substrate. Then, during curing, covalent links
are formed with the substrate, with simultaneous loss of water.
These reactions typically occur simultaneously after the initial
hydrolysis stage.

Although a monolayer of silane-based primer is preferred, multilayer adsorption generally occurs. Estimated thicknesses from
deposition of a 0.25% silane solution onto glass range from three
to eight molecular layers. Kitayama et al. reported that silane-based
monomers produced the best bonding to silica-based ceramic, and
monomers that are based on either phosphate ester or phosphonic
acid monomers produce better bonding to zirconia. These bonding mechanisms are described in Chapter 6, Mechanisms of Adhesion and Primers.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What causes stress concentrations? How can they promote the fracture of
all-ceramic prostheses even in the presence of low occlusal forces?

CAD-CAM Processing of Ceramics
Computer-aided milling of metals, composites, and ceramics is
now possible because of advances in imaging devices, software,
and CAD-CAM milling systems. CAD-CAM ceramic prostheses can be produced either as monolithic lithia disilicate glassceramic or zirconia ceramic structures or as bilayer structures
made from milled copings and layered manually, by hot pressing
or by fusing a CAM-produced veneer to the framework (CAD-on
method). A ceramic veneer that is pressed on metal is referred
to as the press-on metal (POM) method. CAD-CAM prostheses can be produced either by industrial milling processes or by
chairside milling units. The industrial CAD-CAM systems are
very expensive, with typical costs in excess of several hundred
thousand USD. However, they are capable of processing multiple
jobs with a high level of accuracy and reproducibility. Chairside
systems are limited in their processing speed and their ability to
process large cases.
Layered zirconia prostheses can be produced from partially sintered ceramics and shaped by carbide burs to enlarged dimensions
that compensate for sintering shrinkage. Fully sintered ceramics
are shaped by diamond disks and burs to the precise dimensions
derived from a scanned image of the prepared teeth. Typically, the
external surface must be ground and polished manually, although
some CAD-CAM systems are capable of milling the external surface. Figure 10-19 shows a simulated digitized image of a crown
to be produced from a ceramic blank and an adjacent image of a
partially milled crown. Figure 10-20 shows a Cerec ceramic block,
a milled inlay form, and the final inlay.

• Figure 10-19 Computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing
• Figure 10-18 Schematic illustration of silane bonding to silica-based
ceramic.

(CAD-CAM) feldspathic ceramic block (VITABLOCS TriLuxe Forte). Simulated digitized image within the block (left). Partially milled prosthesis that
was processed by the Sirona inLab CAD-CAM system (right). (Courtesy
VITA Zahnfabrik, Bad Säckingen, Germany.)

CHAPTER 10

Ceramic-Based Materials

221

• Figure 10-22 Finished fixed dental prosthesis framework made with

• Figure 10-20 Making prosthesis from computer-aided design/comput-

Cercon core ceramic placed on teeth. (Courtesy Dentsply Ceramco,
Burlington, NJ.)

er-aided manufacturing (CAD-CAM) block. Before milling (left). Intermediate stage of milling (center). The inlay removed from the mounting stub
(right).

• Figure 10-21 Cercon zirconia core ceramic after initial milling of the
“green state” ceramic. (Courtesy Dentsply Ceramco, Burlington, NJ.)

As mentioned previously, zirconia ceramics can be milled in the
green state, in the partially sintered state, or in the fully sintered
state. A four-unit Cercon core ceramic framework can be milled in
the green state (Figure 10-21); after simulated try-in (Figure 10-22);
and after sintering, staining, and glazing the veneering ceramic
(Figure 10-23). A typical procedural sequence for producing
ceramic prostheses by a CAD-CAM system using partially sintered
blanks is as follows:
1. Set the blank in the milling machine holder according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.
2. Set the enlargement factor to compensate for sintering
shrinkage. The factor will vary according to the overall size of
the prosthesis.
3. Insert the appropriate machining/milling tool.
4. After machining is completed, remove the framework and
residual blank.
5. Cut the framework from the blank using a diamond disc.
6. Clean the partially sintered framework completely.
7. Dry the framework completely.
8. Place the framework in the isothermal hot zone of the sintering furnace.
9. Set the thermal processing conditions according to the sintering instructions for the specific product.
10. Sinter the framework to achieve optimum density.
11. After cooling, remove the sintered framework.

• Figure 10-23 Final Cercon fixed dental prosthesis with veneering ceramic and stain characterization. (Courtesy Dentsply Ceramco, Burlington, NJ.)

12. Inspect the framework for surface and subsurface flaws using
fiberoptic transillumination.
13. Evaluate the framework for adequacy of wall thickness, ease
of seating, and marginal fit.
14. If necessary, use a water-cooled diamond tool to perform
minor adjustment corrections.
15. Rinse the framework thoroughly with water, and dry it completely.
16. Depending on the zirconia product, the framework may
be used with or without a veneering ceramic. If a veneering
ceramic is indicated, a transitional liner may be required prior
to the application of the veneering (layering) ceramic.
Chairside milling is the ultimate goal of CAD-CAM processing. Until recently, the ability of a dentist to process his or her
own ceramic prostheses was limited by the lack of skills in layering the veneering ceramic on the milled and fully sintered coping or framework. Because of the experience gained over many
years with the Cerec system, many dentists are now able to fabricate inlays, onlays, and crowns from leucite-based ceramic blanks
(ingots) and lithia-disilicate–based glass-ceramic blanks. Blanks
with gradations of translucency and color, such as those developed
for the VITABLOCS TriLuxe Forte (VITA Zahnfabrik) ceramic
line, allow clinicians to produce single-unit finished prostheses

222

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

without the need for skills in the layering of a veneering porcelain.
The weak link in all-ceramic prostheses is the relatively low fracture resistance of the veneering ceramics (Table 10-7).
The quality and precision of the more costly commercial
imaging, designing, and milling systems have increased markedly since the 1980s because of advances in the software that
controls these variables. Thus it is likely lab-operated CADCAM systems will continue to support crown and bridge needs
well into the future.
A summary of the processing of the different core ceramics and
their processing techniques is shown in Table 10-8.

TABLE 10-7

Methods for Strengthening Ceramic
Restorations
Brittleness and low tensile strength are the two principal deficiencies of ceramics. Methods of overcoming these deficiencies fall into
two general categories: changing microstructures by physical or
chemical means and minimizing stress concentration of prostheses
by reducing inherent surface flaws and redesigning components.
Physical means of strengthening brittle materials can be achieved
by either the introduction of residual compressive stresses or the
interruption of crack propagation through the material. These two

Properties of Veneering Ceramics for Zirconia Core Materials

Veneering Ceramic

Cercon Ceram S

Lava Ceram

Tri-Ceram

VITA VM 9

Cerabien CZR

CTE (100–400 °C)

9.6

9.6

8.2

9.1

9.1

Tg (°C)

488

549

561

>590

561

Strength (MPa)

63 ± 8

81 ± 12

81 ± 22

96 ± 8

66 ± 5

Sintering Temperature (°C)

830

810

755

910

930

CTE, coefficient of thermal expansion.

TABLE 10-8

Methods of Processing the Ceramic Core Component of a Ceramic Prosthesis

Initial Forming
Method

Second Processing
Step

Examples

Initial Material Form

Subsequent Form

Final Steps

Condensation

Ceramco, VITA VMK,
Duceram LFC, IPS d.Sign

Powder and mixing liquid Sintering of core ceramic Dense core ceramic with
less than 5 vol% porosity

Veneer, glaze

Hot-pressing

IPS Empress 2, OPC 3G,
Finesse Pressable

High-quality ceramic
ingot

Stain only or stain
and glaze (inlays), or
veneering ceramic

Stained/glazed inlay or
veneered core

Stain and/or glaze for
crowns and FDPs

Casting

Dicor
(Obsolete)

Glass core

Crystallization heat
treatment (ceramming)

Glass-ceramic core
containing a glass phase
and tetrasilicic fluormica
crystals

Shading porcelain
(obsolete)

Slip-casting

In-Ceram Alumina
In-Ceram Spinel,
In-Ceram Zirconia

Powder and mixing liquid Partial sintering

Partially sintered core

Glass infiltration,
trimming of excess
glass, veneer, glaze

Computer-aided
milling of fully
sintered form

Cerec VITABLOCS
In-Denzir
BruxZir

High-quality ceramic
ingot

Margin repair (if
necessary)

High-quality core
possibly with repaired
margin

Veneer, glaze
(except for BruxZir)

Computer-aided
milling of partially
sintered form

Cercon
Lava
e.max ZirCAD

Partially sintered
ceramic block

Final sintering of
machined/ground core
and margin repair (if
necessary)

Fully sintered core
possibly with repaired
margin

Veneer, glaze

Copy-milling

Variety of ceramic
products

High-quality ceramic
block

Margin repair (if
necessary)

High-quality core
possibly with repaired
margin

Veneer, glaze

Machining, grinding of
dry-pressed powder
on enlarged die

Procera AllCeram

Dry-pressed and
machined alumina block

Sintering

High-quality core
containing 99.9%
alumina

Veneer, glaze

Slip-casting, forming “green” ceramic objects by applying a slurry of ceramic particles to a porous substrate and thereby allowing capillary action to remove liquid
to densify the objects before firing.
Copy-milling, the process of tracing the surface of a resin prosthesis pattern, which is then replicated on a blank of ceramic of improved physical by milling before
receiving aluminous porcelain veneer.

CHAPTER 10

strategies for strengthening brittle materials and specific methods
based on these strategies are discussed next.

Minimizing the Effect of Stress Concentrations
Why do dental ceramic prostheses fail to exhibit the strengths that
we would expect from the high interatomic bond forces? The answer
is that numerous minute scratches and other flaws are present on
the surfaces of these materials. These surface flaws behave as sharp
notches whose tips may be as narrow as the spacing between several
atoms in the material. Under intraoral loading, the tensile stresses
that develop within the ceramic structure are greatly increased and
concentrated at the tips of these flaws. The stress concentration
geometry at the tip of each surface flaw can increase the localized
stress to extremely high levels even though the average stress that
exists throughout the bulk of the structure is relatively low. When
the induced localized tensile stress exceeds the nominal strength of
the material structure, the bonds at the notch tip rupture, forming
a crack. There are other variables that affect the magnitude of these
stresses and microcrack stability, including prosthesis design, load
orientation, loading rate, microstructure, and residual processing
stresses. These variables are discussed in other chapters.
Discontinuities in ceramic structures and in other brittle materials can cause a stress concentration in these areas. The design
of ceramic dental restorations should be carefully planned with
sufficient bulk and a minimum of sharp angular changes to avoid
stress raisers in the ceramic. Abrupt changes in shape or thickness
in the ceramic contour can act as stress raisers and make the restoration more prone to failure. For example, the incisal line angles
on an anterior tooth prepared for a ceramic crown should be well
rounded, and the amount of occlusal reduction for molar teeth
should provide sufficient bulk for the ceramic product under
consideration. Figure 10-24 shows an MC pontic that has fractured because of a high stress concentration at the incisal edge.
Even though an MC restoration is generally more fracture resistant
than most ceramic crowns of the same size and shape, care must
be taken to avoid subjecting the porcelain in an MC prosthesis to
loading that produces large localized stresses. If the occlusion is
not adjusted properly on a porcelain surface, contact points rather
than contact areas will greatly increase the localized stresses in the

• Figure 10-24 Porcelain debonding from a metal pontic substrate of a
long-span metal-ceramic bridge.

Ceramic-Based Materials

223

porcelain surface and within the internal surface of the crown.
These contact stresses can lead to the formation of the so-called
Hertzian cone cracks that often lead to chipping of the occlusal
surface. A small particle of porcelain along the internal porcelain
margin of a crown also induces locally high tensile stresses. A stray
particle that is fused within the inner surface of a shoulder porcelain margin of an MC crown can cause localized tensile stress
concentrations in porcelain when an occlusal force is applied to
the crown.
As the crack propagates through the material, the stress concentration is maintained at the crack tip unless the crack moves
completely through the material or until this crack meets another
crack, a pore, or a crystalline particle, which may reduce the localized stress. The removal of surface flaws or the reduction of their
depth and number can produce a very large increase in strength.
Reducing the depth of surface flaws in the surface of a ceramic is
one of the reasons that polishing and glazing of dental porcelain
is so important.

CRITICAL QUESTION
True or false? Residual compressive stress develops in the veneering ceramic
of an all-ceramic crown in the same way as it does in an MC crown.

Maximize Development of Residual Compressive
Stresses
Recall that when an MC prosthesis is cooled from the sintering
temperature, the metal and veneering ceramic contract at different
rates because of differences in their thermal contraction coefficients.
Meanwhile, the chemical bond between the metal and the porcelain prevents the two components from separating; this condition
forces the two components to adjust their respective dimensions
at the interface as the MC cools. The adjustment of dimension
results in stresses evolved at the interface. The instantaneous stress
at a given temperature during the cooling cycle is termed transient
stress, and the stress distribution, which exists at room temperature, is called the residual stress. Keep in mind that the materials
adjacent to the interface are also under stresses but to a lower level
away from the interface. In an earlier discussion, we called an MC
system thermally compatible when the residual stress developed
is insufficient to cause separation or immediate cracking of the
porcelain or delayed cracking after cooling to room temperature.
However, the type of stress developed in the ceramic component
is of concern. Because ceramic is weak in tensile strength, the presence of any residual tensile stress within the ceramic will make the
ceramic fracture at a lower stress level. In other words, the residual
stress within the ceramic should be compressive.
Additional methods of introducing residual compressive stress
near the surface of ceramics without using several materials of different CTE, such as ion exchange and thermal tempering, are also
discussed in the following section.

Coefficient of Thermal Expansion Mismatch
As discussed earlier, a slightly higher contraction of the metal can
induce a residual compressive stress in the ceramic component
when MC is cooled to room temperature. Figure 10-25 shows
that the ceramic component is under compression in the hoop
and axial (tangential) directions but pulled in the radial direction toward the metal coping by a tensile stress. Figure 10-26
shows a two-dimensional (axial and radial axes) illustration of the

224

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

• Figure 10-25 Residual stress in the porcelain veneer of a metal-ceramic
crown for a case in which the coefficient of thermal contraction for the
porcelain is less than that for the metal. The arrow pointing from the tooth
to the cutout slab does not represent a stress but the projection of the area
from within the prosthesis.

additive effects of tangential tensile stress (+20 MPa) induced in
the porcelain veneer by intraoral forces and residual stress produced by thermal contraction differences. Assuming that the
coefficient of thermal expansion of metal is greater than that
of porcelain (αm > αp), and that there is a residual compressive
stress of -40 MPa, the combined effect is -20 MPa of tangential compressive stress (Figure 10-26, A). Note that the residual
compressive stress in the tangential direction actually increases the
“effective” tensile strength of porcelain because this net compressive stress (-20 MPa) must first be overcome before tensile stress
can develop by the applied intraoral force on the facial surface of
porcelain. The residual compressive circumferential (hoop) stress
(Figure 10-25) should increase the fracture resistance of the MC
bond as the residual compressive tangential stress does.
Conversely, a thermal contraction mismatch that results from a
higher coefficient of contraction of porcelain (αp > αm) will introduce residual tangential and hoop tensile stresses. That means
the resistance of the porcelain to tensile failure is reduced by as
much as the residual tensile stress. The additive effect of tangential tensile stress induced in the porcelain by the intraoral force
can exceed the tensile strength of the porcelain and cause crack
propagation in the porcelain veneer (Figure 10-26, B). When the
contraction coefficient of the porcelain is much lower than that of

• Figure 10-26 Combined effect of residual metal-ceramic incompatibility stress and intraorally induced stresses. Negative values represent
compressive stress, and positive values represent tensile stress. A, Thermally compatible metal-ceramic system αM > αp, in which a residual compressive tangential stress of −40 MPa results in the ceramic veneer. An induced intraoral tensile stress of +20 MPa results in a combined stress
of −20 MPa. B, Thermally incompatible metal-ceramic system αp > αM, in which a residual incompatibility tensile stress of +40 MPa is produced
in the ceramic veneer. An induced intraoral tensile stress of +20 MPa results in a combined stress of +60 MPa and the formation of a crack within
the ceramic.

CHAPTER 10

• Figure 10-27 Crack in metal-ceramic crown after cooling of a three-unit
bridge.

Ceramic-Based Materials

225

Thermal Tempering
Perhaps the most common method for strengthening glasses in
general usage is by thermal tempering. Thermal tempering creates
residual surface compressive stresses by rapidly cooling (quenching) the surface of the object while hot and in the softened state.
This rapid cooling produces a skin of rigid glass surrounding a soft
core. As the softened core solidifies, the core tends to shrink, but the
outer skin remains rigid. The pull of the hardening core on the outer
skin during shrinking generates residual compressive stresses within
the outer surface while the core experiences residual tensile stresses.
Thermal tempering is used to strengthen glass for uses such
as automobile windows and windshields, sliding glass doors, and
diving masks. A more effective approach for dental applications is
quenching hot glass-phase ceramics in a silicone oil bath or other
special liquids. This thermal tempering treatment induces a protective region of compressive stress within the surface. However,
this process is technique sensitive because large counterbalancing
tensile stresses may develop when excessive cooling rates occur
during the tempering process.

Interruption of Crack Propagation
the metal, porcelain cracking or MC bond failure can occur near
the metal–porcelain interface (Figure 10-27). This incompatibility
failure is likely caused by the development of radial tensile stresses
that exceed the tensile strength of porcelain.
The principle of strengthening by thermal expansion mismatch can also be applied to all-ceramic systems. One method is
to choose veneering ceramics whose thermal expansion or contraction coefficient is slightly less than that of the core ceramic.
Consider three layers of porcelain, the outer two of the same
composition and coefficient of thermal contraction and the
inner layer of a different composition with a higher coefficient
of thermal contraction. Suppose that the layers are bonded
together, and the bonded structure is allowed to cool to room
temperature. The inner layer has a higher coefficient of thermal
contraction and tends to contract more on cooling. Thus on
cooling to room temperature, the inner layer produces axial and
hoop compressive stresses in the adjacent outer layer. The ability to produce this protective compressive stress to the ceramic
structure before the crown is cemented to prepared teeth should
increase the fracture resistance and survival probability of the
prosthesis.

Ion Exchange
The technique of ion exchange is an effective method of introducing residual compressive stresses into the surface of a ceramic. If
a sodium-containing glass article is placed in a bath of molten
potassium nitrate, potassium ions in the bath exchange places
with some of the sodium ions on the surface of the glass article
and remain in place after cooling. Because the potassium ion
radius is about 35% larger than that of the sodium ion, the diffusion of the potassium ion into the place formerly occupied by
the sodium ion causes crowding of atoms on the surface, creating
residual compressive stresses on the surface. Increases of 100%
or more in the flexural strength of feldspathic porcelains have
been achieved with several ion-exchange products that contain
a significant concentration of small sodium ions. However, the
depth of the compression zone is less than 100 μm. Therefore this
strengthening effect could be lost if the porcelain or glass-ceramic
surface is ground, worn, or eroded by long-term exposure to certain inorganic acids.

When we discuss the fracture of an object, we often attribute the
cause to crack propagation. Thus stopping, impeding, or redirecting the crack propagation can prevent or delay fracture until a
greater external force is applied. The increase in stress to fracture
an object is the result of strengthening. There are two approaches
to interrupting crack propagation, as discussed next.

Crystalline Particle Strengthening
Reinforcement of ceramics with a dispersed phase of a different
material can prevent or inhibit the propagation of cracks. This
process is referred to as dispersion strengthening. When small, tough
crystals are homogeneously distributed in a glass, the ceramic structure is toughened and strengthened because cracks cannot penetrate
the fine particles as easily as through the glass. This technique was
applied decades ago in the development of aluminous porcelains (in
which Al2O3 particles were dispersed in a glassy porcelain matrix) for
all-porcelain crowns. Most current dental veneering ceramics have
a glassy matrix that is reinforced by a dispersed crystal phase. Glass
matrices in dental ceramics have been strengthened and toughened
by a variety of dispersed crystalline phases, including leucite, lithia
disilicate, alumina, and tetrasilicic fluormica.
Almost all modern higher-strength ceramics derive their
improved fracture resistance from the crack-blocking ability of
crystalline particles. Hot-pressed core ceramics and veneering glassceramics contain a glass phase that is strengthened with crystalline
particles of leucite, lithia disilicate, alumina, magnesia-alumina spinel, and other types of crystals. Toughening depends on the crystal
type, crystal size, volume fraction, interparticle spacing, and CTE
relative to the glass matrix. For example, the fracture toughness
(KIc) of soda-lime-silica glass is 0.75 MPa•m1/2. If one disperses
approximately 34 vol% of leucite crystals in the glass, such as in
IPS Empress, KIc increases only to 1.3 MPa•m1/2. However, by dispersing 70 vol% of interlinked lithia disilicate crystals in a glass
matrix, such as in IPS e.max Press, KIc, increases to 3.3 MPa•m1/2.
Transformation Toughening
In contrast to dispersion strengthening, the ability of a material to
undergo a stress-induced transformation that hinders crack propagation is known as transformation toughening. A good example is
tetragonal zirconia polycrystals in zirconia-based dental ceramics

226

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

Crack path Porcelain
Interaction
zone
Metal

• Figure 10-28 Cross-sectional illustration of interfacial zone fracture: ceramic-metal oxide (top), transmetal oxide (middle), and metal-metal oxide (bottom).

that undergo a transformation into a stable monoclinic crystal
upon the impact of growing microcracks. A detailed discussion is
presented in the section of Stabilized Zirconia.

Summary
The fracture resistance of ceramic prostheses can be increased
through one or more of the following six options: (1) select
stronger and tougher ceramics; (2) develop residual compressive
stresses within the surface of the material by thermal tempering;
(3) develop residual compressive stress within interfacial regions of
weaker, less tough ceramic layers by properly matching coefficient
of thermal expansion; (4) reduce the tensile stress in the ceramic
by appropriate selection of stiffer supporting materials (greater
elastic moduli); (5) design the ceramic prosthesis with greater
bulk and broader radii of curvature to minimize the magnitude of
tensile stresses and stress concentrations during function; and (6)
adhesively bond the ceramic crowns to tooth structure.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which processing technique is most likely to generate the deepest flaws in a
ceramic core framework?

Effect of Design on Fracture Susceptibility of
Metal-Ceramic and All-Ceramic Restorations
There are many examples of atypical designs that lead to ceramic
fracture of MC restorations. Tougher, stronger ceramics can sustain higher tensile stresses before cracks develop in areas of tensile
stress. Conventional feldspathic porcelains should not be used as
the core of ceramic crowns, especially in posterior areas, because
occlusal forces can easily subject them to tensile stresses that
exceed the tensile strength of the core ceramic. Because the forces
on anterior teeth are relatively small, low to moderate tensile
stresses can be supported by ceramic crowns more safely. However,
if there is a great amount of vertical overlap (overbite) with only

a moderate amount of horizontal overlap (overjet), high tensile
stresses can be produced.
When fractures occur, a sketch of the observed fracture surface is helpful to assist in determining the cause of fracture. An
illustration of the main crack patterns that can develop in an MC
crown is shown in Figure 10-28. Some cracks travel along the
metal–metal oxide interface, and others may propagate along the
interface between the metal oxide and opaque porcelain. The third
type can occur cohesively within porcelain entirely. The first two
types are indicative of a material processing error, and the third
may be indicative of a crown design error, excessive loading, or
other uncontrollable factors.
Although ceramic and MC prostheses are susceptible to design
errors, some variations in design have minimal effects on the stress
levels generated during loading. For example, the MC crown
designs shown in Figure 10-29 have quite different metal thicknesses in the facial area, yet finite-element analyses reveal no significant differences in the maximum principal tensile stresses that
develop under simulated loading.
Sharp line angles in the preparation also will create areas of stress
concentration in the restoration, primarily where a tensile component of bending stress develops. A small particle of ceramic along
the internal porcelain margin of a crown can induce locally high
tensile stresses during try-in or final cementation. Furthermore,
when grinding of this surface is required for adjustment of fit,
one should use the finest-grit abrasive that will accomplish the
task. This precaution will reduce the probability of forming microcracks and will reduce the depth of microfissures that are produced by the abrasive particles. Grinding flaws in the inner surface
of ceramic crowns represent the greatest damage that can be produced in ceramics by processing techniques.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Describe four ways by which control of tooth preparations and the design of
crowns and bridges can increase the resistance to fracture of all-ceramic
crowns.

CHAPTER 10

1.7

1.9

2.0

227

2.0

0.6 mm

1.4 mm
1.2 mm

Ceramic-Based Materials

0.6 mm
0.3 mm

0.1 mm

• Figure 10-29 Cross-sectional illustrations of metal-ceramic crown designs with reduced metal thickness. Metal is represented by an aqua color and porcelain by yellow. Facial metal thickness of 0.3 mm
(left). Facial metal thickness of 0.1 mm represents a more aesthetic option (right).

Connector width

Connector height

• Figure 10-30 Connector dimensions for a three-unit ceramic bridge.

Most ceramics should be designed in such a way as to
overcome their weaknesses, that is, the relatively low fracture
toughness and tensile strength of veneering ceramics and their
susceptibility to crack formation in the presence of surface flaws.
The design should avoid exposure of the ceramic to high tensile
stresses. Knife-edge margins should be avoided because of the
risk of cracking or chipping during the try-in phase. The tensile
stresses in a ceramic FDP can be reduced by using greater connector thicknesses (Figure 10-30) and by broadening the radius
of curvature of the gingival embrasure (Figure 10-31) portion
of the interproximal connector. However, a connector height
greater than 4 mm in the posterior area of the mouth is often
unrealistic because of shorter crowns and can result in bulky,
unaesthetic connectors (Figure 10-32). Fractured connectors are
fairly common, especially when the connector size is less than
that recommended by the manufacturer. Figure 10-33 illustrates
an example of this design deficiency. The distal connector of

• Figure 10-31 A three-unit ceramic anterior-posterior fixed dental prosthesis produced totally from a lithia-disilicate–based core ceramic. Note
the relatively large connector (4 mm in height) necessary to resist fracture
in posterior areas.

the three-unit bridge made from a lithia-disilicate core ceramic
fractured after 18 months in service, and the mesial connector
fractured later. The distal connector was only 3.5 mm or 0.5
mm less than was recommended. Quinn et al. studied the effect
of stress concentration factor (Chapter 4, Stress Concentration)
in the gingival embrasure area on the predicted minimum connector size needed for a four-unit zirconia framework to ensure
a 95% survival against fracture over a period of 20 years. The
results confirm the importance of geometrical features on the
maximum stress and the corresponding probability of failure
(Figure 10-34).

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the indications and contraindications for the use of all-ceramic
crowns?

228

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

rOE = 0.90 mm

rOE = 0.25 mm

Design I

Design III

rGE = 0.90 mm

rGE = 0.90 mm

rOE = 0.90 mm

rOE = 0.25 mm

Design II

Design IV

rGE = 0.25 mm

rGE = 0.25 mm

• Figure 10-32 Ceramic bridges with various radii of curvature in occlusal and gingival embrasures. Designs I and III have the lowest stress concentration factors in the gingival (tensile) embrasure areas, which
have the larger radii of curvature.

A

B
• Figure 10-33 A, Postcementation photo of three-unit ceramic bridge made with a lithia-disilicate−based
core ceramic. B, Fractured connectors of the bridge after approximately 18 months. The posterior connector height was found to be 3.5 mm, which was 0.5 mm less than that recommended by the manufacturer.

Principles for Selection of Dental Ceramics
A properly made MC crown is more fracture resistant and more
durable than most all-ceramic crowns and bridges. This technology is well established compared with the technologies required
for the most recent all-ceramic products. Although the biocompatibility of some metals used for copings and frameworks may be
a concern for patients who have known allergies to those metals,
these situations are rare. A metal coping or framework provides
an advantage compared with zirconia-based ceramic prostheses
when endodontic access openings though crowns are required.
Temporary repairs for ceramic fractures that extend to the metal
framework are possible, without the need for intraoral sandblasting treatment, by using current resin bonding agents. All-ceramic
crowns can be more susceptible to chipping fracture and to bulk
fracture in posterior sites. Fractures of ceramic connectors represent another disadvantage of all-ceramic prostheses, especially
when the manufacturer’s recommendations for connector shape
and size cannot be applied. Overall, the aesthetic appearance of
an all-ceramic restoration is generally superior to that of an MC

restoration for anterior and posterior situations. However, properly designed MC crowns are highly aesthetic when adequate
tooth-reduction principles are satisfied. In addition, metal coping
designs, such as thinner facial metal (0.1 to 0.5 mm) and/or knifeedge facial metal margins, or collarless metal margins can further
enhance the aesthetic potential of these anterior crowns.
Although an all-ceramic crown exhibits superb aesthetics, some
all-ceramic bridges are not as aesthetic because the connectors must
be sufficiently thick to minimize the risk for fracture, or the core
ceramic is excessively opaque. Some all-ceramic crowns will not
be aesthetic if the tooth preparations are inadequate, particularly
when insufficient tooth structure has been removed. Not all
patients will benefit from the placement of all-ceramic crowns or
bridges. Some individuals exhibit certain characteristics that would
allow only a metal or MC bridge to be used. For example, if an
individual bruxes frequently and with great force, an all-ceramic
bridge would not be likely to survive. A ceramic bridge should not
be placed in patients who have a long span across the pontic site
because the higher stresses under function could lead to premature
fracture. There are several clear indications and contraindications

CHAPTER 10

• Figure 10-34 The fatigue curve is the result of finite-element analysis showing the minimum connector diameter required for a four-unit
all-ceramic bridge made from 3 mol% Y2O3 tetragonal zirconia polycrystal (3Y-TZP) to ensure a survival rate of 95% for at least 20 years.
Other parameters used in the analysis are mastication frequency of
1400 cycles/day and maximum cyclic stress of 346 MPa. The stress
concentration factor (K) is the ratio of maximum stress in the gingival embrasure area (Figure 10-34) to either the nominal or net-section
stress across the connector. The clench curve shows the connector
diameter needed to prevent fracture under the same stress of 346 MPa
(single cycle) for comparison. (Adapted from Quinn GD, et al: Fatigue of
zirconia and dental bridge geometry: design implications, Dent Mater
26:1133–1136, 2010.)

Ceramic-Based Materials

that should be kept in mind when treatment planning crown and
bridge cases made with a ceramic system. Therefore all-ceramics
are preferred over MCs when aesthetics is a prime concern, when
MC aesthetics is unacceptable, or when a history of metal hypersensitivity exists. Table 10-9 lists the types of dental ceramics by
their recommended indications for and contraindications against
their use based in part on evidence from clinical studies. Although
manufacturers and dental laboratory owners usually list the indications for use of ceramic products, they do not typically state their
contraindications. Only after clinical evidence of adverse events
occur do the indications change and contraindications become
more clearly specified. The information presented does not guarantee success nor is it predictive of failure, because many variables
are involved that may shift the balance of risk from low to high.
The toughest and strongest core ceramics have opaque cores
that are veneered with layers of translucent ceramic. The prediction of the most durable ceramic should be based on the fracture
resistance of the entire bilayer or trilayer system, not simply of the
core ceramic itself. In the absence of randomized, controlled clinical data, in vitro tests of the monolithic ceramic materials and of
layered ceramics that simulate the designs used in clinical practice
are highly desirable. For example, Figure 10-35 shows the mean
fracture loads across three strength ranges of three-unit bridges
made using four ceramic materials. If more bridges had been
tested, Weibull analyses could have been performed on the data
to determine the reliability and fracture probabilities over time.
More importantly, finite-element models can be developed for any
prosthesis design that can be applied with dynamic fatigue data
for the component ceramic materials using Life Ceramics Analysis
and Reliability Evaluation software (CARES; NASA) to predict
the time-dependent probabilities for fracture.

4000
Cercon®

DC Zirkon

In-Ceram® Zirconia

IPS Empress® 2

3000

Fracture force (N)

2577
2200
1937

2140
2000

1821
1732

1753
1499
1298

1243
1047

1000

795

0
Highest 5%

229

Average

Lowest 5%

Ceramics for three-unit FPDs
• Figure 10-35 Average loads (N) required to fracture at midpontic of three-unit bridges made from four
ceramics in which the core ceramic thickness was 0.8 mm, the veneer thickness was 0.7 mm, and the
connector height was 4 mm. The differences between the weakest and strongest ceramic bridges in
each grouping were 99%, 110%, and 129%, respectively. The core ceramics for the four products are as
follows: Cercon and DC Zirkon-Ceram are zirconia-based ceramics, In-Ceram Zirconia is glass-infiltrated
zirconia-reinforced alumina ceramic, and Empress 2 is a lithia-disilicate–based ceramic. (Adapted from
Tinschert J, et al: Fracture resistance of lithium disilicate-, alumina-, and zirconia-based three-unit fixed
partial dentures: a laboratory study, Int J Prosthodont 14:231–238, 2001.)

230

PA RT I I I

TABLE 10-9

Indirect Restorative Materials

General Indications and Contraindications for Use of Dental Ceramics

Type

Primary Application

Secondary Applications

Contraindications

Feldspathic porcelain

Metal-ceramic veneers
Anterior laminate veneers

Single-surface inlays/low-stress sites
High translucency needed

Inlays, onlays, crowns and bridges
(except as metal-ceramic veneers)
Bruxism

Aluminous porcelain

Core ceramic for anterior crowns

Low-stress premolar crowns

Molar crowns
Bridges
Bruxism

Leucite glass-ceramic

Anterior single-unit crowns
Anterior laminate veneers

Low-stress premolar inlays and
crowns
High translucency needed

High-stress situations
Bridges
Bruxism

Lithia disilicate glass-ceramic

Anterior and premolar crowns
Anterior 3-unit bridges
Premolar crowns

Anterior laminate veneers
Posterior 3-unit bridges to 2nd
premolar

High-stress posterior situations
Bridges involving molar teeth
Bruxism

Alumina

Core ceramic for crowns
Low-stress anterior bridges

Low-stress posterior bridges

Anterior veneers
High-stress posterior bridges
Bruxism

Glass-infiltrated spinel

Anterior crowns

High translucency needed

Anterior bridges
Posterior crowns and bridges
Bruxism

Glass-infiltrated alumina

Anterior and posterior crowns

Anterior bridge substructures
up to 3 units

Anterior veneers
Posterior crowns and bridges
High translucency needed
Bruxism

Glass-infiltrated alumina/zirconia

Posterior crowns
Posterior bridge substructures up to
3 units

Anterior bridge substructures
up to 3 units

Anterior veneers and crowns
Where high translucency needed
Bruxism

Zirconia (Y-TZP)
(with veneering ceramic)

Posterior crowns
Posterior bridge substructures up to
5 units

Zirconia (3Y-TZP)
(monolithic, without veneering
ceramic)

Posterior crowns and bridges
(limited clinical data available)

Posterior core-ceramic bridges

Anterior veneers, crowns, and
bridges
High translucency is needed
Bruxism

Ce-TZP/Al2O3

Posterior crowns and
bridge substructures
(no clinical data available)

—

Anterior veneers, crowns, and
bridges
High translucency is needed
Bruxism

4Y-PSZ

Anterior crowns, posterior crowns,
veneers, onlays

Bridges, high-stress areas

5Y-PSZ

Anterior crowns, posterior crowns,
veneers, onlays

Bridges, high-stress areas

Anterior veneers, crowns, and
bridges
High translucency is needed
Bruxism

4Y-PZE, 5 mol% Y2O3 partially stabilized zirconia; 5Y-PZE, 5 mol% Y2O3 partially stabilized zirconia; 3Y-tZP, 3 mol% Y2O3 tetragonal zirconia polycrystal; Y-TZP,
yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia polycrystal.

The success or failure of ceramic restorations can be related
to material-, dentist-, lab-, technician-, and patient-related factors. The specific cause of failure often results from failure to
follow the manufacturer’s guidelines. For example, feldspathic
porcelain must be supported by a metal coping or high-strength
ceramic core to resist occlusal loading and prevent excessive
flexural strain and should not be used as the core ceramic for
a ceramic-ceramic crown. The comparative fracture toughness
values of ceramics are listed in Tables 10-5 and 10-6. Another

cause of fracture is inadequate occlusal reduction on premolar and molar teeth. A minimum of 1.5-mm reduction is recommended for MC crowns in molar areas, compared with a
thickness of 2.0 mm for most ceramic crowns. However, the
introduction of monolithic zirconia crowns suggests that occlusal reductions as low as 0.6 mm may be adequate in some cases.
For any ceramic product, the tooth-preparation guidelines recommended by the manufacturer should be followed for the
specific ceramic that will be used. These guidelines should be

CHAPTER 10

discussed with the lab technician to ensure that standardized
procedures are followed.
When a dentist writes a prescription for an MC or ceramic
prosthesis, specific information is required on the material to be
used and the design that is needed. How should these decisions be
made by a competent clinician? The intraoral conditions and optimal treatment options must first be considered. For missing teeth,
restoring the dentition to occlusal function may be accomplished
with implants and crowns or FDPs. The aesthetic needs, expectations, and financial resources of the patient are the next criteria to
be considered. The treatment choice is then made on the basis of
anticipated success rates, survival times, and minimization of risk
factors that are determined from published clinical studies and the
previous experience of the clinician, the dental lab technician, and
their colleagues. For recent dental school graduates, the previous
experience is often based on the materials and techniques learned
in dental school. For well-established dentists, experiences in dental practices complement their dental school and advanced education training. Although one may have developed an extensive base
of experience, the decision matrix of materials, design options,
techniques, experience, patient conditions, and predicted success
rates represents an overwhelming combination of variables to factor into optimal treatment decision making.
The dental literature provides convincing evidence that the
most durable types of posterior prostheses are those produced
from high-noble alloys, particularly gold-based alloys. However,
the profession has entered an aesthetics-oriented phase in which
decisions tend to favor appearance over long survival times. Thus
the selection of dental materials products tends to favor the use of
resin-based composites and ceramics for single-unit and multipleunit restorations. In many cases, MC material systems are chosen

Ceramic-Based Materials

231

over all-ceramic systems as a compromise between aesthetic needs
and minimizing the time-dependent probability of failure or maximizing survival.
The dentist and lab technician are faced with a complex challenge of deciding which ceramic should be used for each specific
clinical situation. Although some products are recommended for
posterior three-unit to five-unit FDPs, one should first consider
the use of all-metal FDPs or MC FDPs because these prostheses
will have a much greater life expectancy. Only when a patient
is highly resistant to accepting metallic components during the
treatment-planning discussions should all-ceramic FDPs be used
because the fracture resistance of posterior all-ceramic FDPs is
based on (1) the strength and fracture toughness of the ceramic
components, (2) the connector dimensions (minimum height
of 4 mm), (3) connector shape (gingival embrasures must have
broad radii of curvature), and (4) the patient’s biting force. Thus
the selection of a ceramic for these prostheses is a very risky
proposition because optimal conditions for their success are not
yet known.

IdentCeram Certificates for Identification of
Ceramic Products
IdentAlloy certificates have been used by dental labs for many
years to identify alloys that are used in prosthetic cases sent by
the lab to dentists. Because of the strong recent demand for
all-ceramic prostheses, IdentCeram certificates were introduced
in 2007 to identify the manufacturer/company, brand name, and
composition of the materials used for all-ceramic prostheses. Six
of the IdentCeram certificates are shown in Figure 10-36. The

• Figure10-36 IdentCeram certificates.

232

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

letter codes are designated as follows: AO (aluminum oxide), YZ
(yttrium zirconia), LD (lithia disilicate glass-ceramic), FA (fluorapatite glass-ceramic), LE (leucite glass), and LG (leucite glassceramic). There are newer certificates such as HC (hybrid ceramic)
and ZLS (zirconia lithium silicate) not featured here. The certificates exhibit a recognizable letter code that helps ensure proper
insurance coding. These codes correspond to IdentAlloy codes
for high noble (HN), noble (N), and predominantly base metal
(PB) alloys. By using these widely recognized certificates, labs and

dentists gain a proven, practical way to document this information in their patient charts and ensure consistent communication
with their dental lab technicians.

Selected Readings

DeHoff PH, Anusavice KJ: Viscoelastic finite element stress analysis of
the thermal compatibility of dental bilayer ceramic systems, Int J
Prosthodont 22:56–61, 2009.
Denry IL, Peacock JJ, Holloway JA: Effect of heat treatment after accelerated aging on phase transformation in 3Y-TZP, J Biomed Mater Res B
93:236–243, 2010.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Anusavice KJ: Ceramic design concepts based on
stress distribution analysis, Compend Contin Educ Dent 21:649–652,
2000.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Young H, Jones J, et al: Four-year clinical performance of a lithia disilicate-based core ceramic for posterior fixed partial dentures, Int J Prosthodont 21:155–160, 2008.
Mecholsky JJ Jr: Fractography: determining the sites of fracture initiation, Dent Mater. 11:113–116, 1995.

Albakry M, Guazzato M, Swain MV: Fracture toughness and hardness
evaluation of three pressable all-ceramic dental materials, J Dent
31:181–188, 2003.
Anusavice KJ, DeHoff PH, Hojjatie B, et al: Influence of tempering and
contraction mismatch on crack development in ceramic surfaces, J Dent
Res 68:1182–1187, 1989.
Anusavice KJ, Hojjatie B: Effect of thermal tempering on strength and
crack propagation of feldspathic porcelain, J Dent Res 70:1009–
1013, 1991.
Anusavice KJ, Shen C, Vermost B, et al: Strengthening of porcelain by
ion exchange subsequent to thermal tempering, Dent Mater 8:149–
152, 1992.
Chevalier J, Gremillard L, Deville S: Low-temperature degradation of
zirconia and implications for biomedical implants, Annu Rev Mater
Res 37:1–32, 2007.

Acknowledgment
The author wishes to acknowledge Dr. Kenneth Anusavice for his
tremendous work in previous editions of this chapter.

Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Aboushelib MN, de Kler M, van der Zel JM, et al: Microtensile bond
strength and impact energy of fracture of CAD-veneered zirconia restorations, J Prosthodont 18:211–216, 2009.
Albakry M, Guazzato M, Swain MV: Biaxial flexural strength, elastic
moduli, and X-ray diffraction characterization of three pressable allceramic materials, J Prosthet Dent 89:374–380, 2003.
Albakry M, Guazzato M, Swain MV: Fracture toughness and hardness
evaluation of three pressable all-ceramic dental materials, J Dent
31:181–188, 2003.
Albakry M, Guazzato M, Swain MV: Influence of hot pressing on
the microstructure and fracture toughness of two pressable dental
glass-ceramics, J Biomed Mater Res B:Appl Biomater 71:99–107,
2004.
Anusavice KJ, DeHoff PH, Hojjatie B, et al: Influence of tempering
and contraction mismatch on crack development in ceramic surfaces, J Dent Res 68:1182–1187, 1989.
A study of the application of thermal tempering to strengthen dental
porcelain.
Anusavice KJ, Hojjatie B: Effect of thermal tempering on strength and
crack propagation of feldspathic porcelain, J Dent Res 70:1009–
1013, 1991.
A study that showed a 158% increase in biaxial flexure strength of a
porcelain subjected to thermal tempering.
Anusavice KJ, Hojjatie B, Chang T-C: Effect of grinding and fluoride-gel
exposure on strength of ion-exchanged porcelain, J Dent Res 73:1444–
1449, 1994.
A study that demonstrated the weakening of an ion-exchanged porcelain by grinding to a depth of 100 μm or more.
Anusavice KJ, Kakar K, Ferree N: Which mechanical and physical testing methods are relevant for predicting the clinical performance of
ceramic-based dental prostheses? Clin Oral Implants Res 18(Suppl
3):218–231, 2007.
Anusavice KJ, Shen C, Vermost B, et al: Strengthening of porcelain
by ion exchange subsequent to thermal tempering, Dent Mater
8:149–152, 1992.
The influence of ion exchange and tempering on strengthening of
porcelain.
ASTM-C1161: Standard Test Method for Flexural Strength for Advanced
Ceramics at Ambient Temperature, West Conshohocken, 2002, American Society for Testing Materials.
ASTM-C1368: Standard Test Method for Determination of Slow Crack
Growth Parameters of Advanced Ceramics by Constant Stress-Rate Flexural Testing at Ambient Temperature, West Conshohocken, 2001,
American Society for Testing Materials.
ASTM-C1239: Reporting Uniaxial Strength Data and Estimating Weibull
Distribution Parameters for Advanced Ceramics, West Conshohocken,
2000, American Society for Testing Materials.
ASTM-F394-78: Standard Test Method for Biaxial Flexure Strength (Modulus of Rupture) of Ceramic Substrates, West Conshohocken, 1996,
American Society for Testing Materials.
Ban S, Anusavice KJ: Influence of test method on failure stress of brittle
dental materials, J Dent Res 69:1791–1799, 1990.
Barinov SM, Ivanov NV, Orlov SV, et al: Influence of environment
on delayed failure of alumina ceramics, J Eur Ceram Soc 18:2057–
2063, 1998.
Beuer F, Edelhoff D, Gernet W, et al: Three-year clinical prospective evaluation of zirconia-based posterior fixed dental prostheses (FDPs), Clin
Oral Investig 13:445–451, 2009.
Binns DB: Some physical properties of two-phase crystal-glass solids editor. In Stewart GH, editor: Science of Ceramics, Vol 1, London, 1962,
Academic Press, pp 315–344.
A classic paper on the reinforcement of glasses with crystalline particles.
Bulpakdi P, Taskonak B, Yan JH, et al: Failure analysis of clinically failed
all-ceramic fixed partial dentures using fractal geometry, Dent Mater
25:634–640, 2009.

Cattani-Lorente M, Scherrer SS, Ammann P, et al: Low temperature degradation of a Y-TZP dental ceramic, Acta Biomater 7:858–865, 2010.
Cattell MJ, Chadwick TC, Knowles JC, et al: Flexural strength optimisation of a leucite reinforced glass ceramic, Dent Mater 17:21–33, 2001.
Cattell MJ, Clarke RL, Lynch EJ: The biaxial flexural strength and reliability of four dental ceramics. Part II, J Dent 25:409–414, 1997.
Cattell MJ, Clarke RL, Lynch EJ: The transverse strength, reliability
and microstructural features of four dental ceramics. Part I, J Dent
25:399–407, 1997.
Cesar PF, Soki FN, Yoshimura HN, et al: Influence of leucite content on
slow crack growth of dental porcelains, Dent Mater 24:1114–1122, 2008.
Cesar PF, Yoshimura HN, Miranda WG Jr, et al: Relationship between
fracture toughness and flexural strength in dental porcelains, J Biomed
Mater Res B 78:265–273, 2006.
Chevalier J, Gremillard L, Deville S: Low-temperature degradation
of zirconia and implications for biomedical implants, Annu Rev
Mater Res 37:1–32, 2007.
Coornaert J, Adriaens P, De Boever J: Long-term clinical study of porcelain-fused-to-gold restorations, J Prosthet Dent 51:338–342, 1984.
A 7.5-year study survival level of 97.7% for meta -ceramic crowns
and FDPs.
Davidge RW, McLaren JR, Tappin G: Strength–probability–time (SPT)
relationships in ceramics, J Mater Sci 8:1699–1705, 1973.
de Kler M, de Jager N, Meegdes M, et al: Influence of thermal expansion
mismatch and fatigue loading on phase changes in porcelain veneered
Y-TZP zirconia discs, J Oral Rehabil 34:841–847, 2007.
DeHoff PH, Anusavice KJ: Analysis of tempering stresses in bilayered
porcelain discs, J Dent Res 71:1139–1144, 1992.
Demonstrated feasibility of air blasting a porcelain to induce surface
compression.
DeHoff PH, Anusavice KJ: Viscoelastic finite element stress analysis
of the thermal compatibility of dental bilayer ceramic systems, Int
J Prosthodont 22:56–61, 2009.
Della Bona A, Anusavice KJ, Mecholsky JJ Jr: Failure analysis of resin
composite bonded to ceramic, Dent Mater 19:693–699, 2003.
Della Bona A, Kelly JR: The clinical success of all-ceramic restorations,
J Am Dent Assoc 139(Suppl 9):8S–13S, 2008.
Della Bona A, van Noort R: Shear vs. tensile bond strength of resin composite bonded to ceramic, J Dent Res 74:1591–1596, 1995.
Denry I, Kelly J: State of the art of zirconia for dental applications, Dent
Mater 24:299–307, 2008.
Denry IL, Holloway JA: Microstructural and crystallographic surface
changes after grinding zirconia-based dental ceramics, J Biomed Mater
Res B 76:440–448, 2006.
Denry IL, Peacock JJ, Holloway JA: Effect of heat treatment after
accelerated aging on phase transformation in 3Y-TZP, J Biomed
Mater Res B 93:236–243, 2010.
Donovan TE: Factors essential for successful all-ceramic restorations,
J Am Dent Assoc 139(Suppl 9):14S–18S, 2008.
Dorsch P: Thermal compatibility of materials for porcelain-fused-tometal (PFM) restorations, Ceramic Forum International/Ber Dt Keram
Ges 59:1–5, 1982.
Identified key factors involved in porcelain-metal compatibility.
Drummond JL: In vitro aging of yttria-stabilized zirconia, J Am Ceram
Soc 72:675–676, 1989.
Ebrahimi ME, Chevalier J, Fantozzi G: Slow crack-growth behavior of
alumina ceramics, J Mater Res 15:142–147, 2000.
El Attaoui H, Saadaoui M, Chevalier J: Static and cyclic crack propagation in Ce-TZP ceramics with different amounts of transformation
toughening, J Eur Ceram Soc 27:483–486, 2007.
Eliasson A, Arnelund CF, Johansson A: A clinical evaluation of cobaltchromium metal-ceramic fixed partial dentures and crowns: A threeto seven-year retrospective study, J Prosthet Dent 98:6–16, 2007.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Anusavice KJ: Ceramic design concepts based
on stress distribution analysis, Compend Contin Educ Dent
21:649–652, 2000.
A review of design concepts based on finite element analyses of stresses
in ceramic crowns.
232.e1

Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Young H, Jones J, et al: Four-year clinical performance of a lithia disilicate-based core ceramic for posterior fixed
partial dentures, Int J Prosthodont 21:155–160, 2008.
Fairhurst CW, Anusavice KJ, Hashinger DT, et al: Thermal expansion of
dental alloys and porcelains, J Biomed Mater Res 14:435–446, 1980.
Thermal expansion data are provided for alloys and porcelains, and
changes in porcelain thermal expansion that can be caused by multiple firings are described.
Fairhurst CW, Lockwood PE, Ringle RD, et al: Dynamic fatigue of feldspathic porcelain, Dent Mater 9:269–273, 1993.
Fischer J, Stawarczyk B: Compatibility of machined Ce-TZP/Al2O3
nanocomposite and a veneering ceramic, Dent Mater 23:1500–
1505, 2007.
Fischer J, Stawarczyk B, Trottmann A, et al: Impact of thermal properties
of veneering ceramics on the fracture load of layered Ce-TZP/A nanocomposite frameworks, Dent Mater 25:326–330, 2009.
Fischer H, Weber M, Marx R: Lifetime prediction of all-ceramic bridges
by computational methods, J Dent Res 82:238–242, 2003.
Gibbs CH, Anusavice KJ, Young HM, et al: Maximum clenching force of
patients with moderate loss of posterior tooth support: A pilot study,
J Prosthet Dent 88:498–502, 2002.
Gonzaga CC, Cesar PF, Miranda WG Jr, et al: Slow crack growth and
reliability of dental ceramics, Dent Mater 27:394–406, 2011.
Gonzaga CC, Okada CY, Cesar PF, et al: Effect of processing induced
particle alignment on the fracture toughness and fracture behavior of
multiphase dental ceramics, Dent Mater 25:1293–1301, 2009.
Gonzaga CC, Yoshimura HN, Cesar PF, et al: Subcritical crack growth
in porcelains, glass-ceramics, and glass-infiltrated alumina composite
for dental restorations, J Mater Sci Mater Med 20:1017–1024, 2009.
Griffith AA: The phenomenon of rupture and flow in solids, Phil Trans
Roy Soc Lond A 221:163–198, 1920.
One of the pioneers who contributed to the of field fracture mechanics.
Guazzato M, Proos K, Sara G, et al: Strength, reliability, and mode
of fracture of bilayered porcelain/core ceramics, Int J Prosthodont
17:142–149, 2004.
Guazzato M, Walton TR, Franklin W, et al: Influence of thickness and
cooling rate on development of spontaneous cracks in porcelain/
zirconia structures, Aust Dent J 55:306–310, 2010.
Heuer AH: Transformation toughening in ZrO2-containing ceramics,
J Am Ceram Soc 70:689–698, 1987.
Höland W, Beall G, editors: Glass Ceramic Technology, Westerville, OH,
2002, The American Ceramic Society.
Excellent reference on glass-ceramic composition, microstructure, and
properties.
Höland W, Schweiger M, Frank M, et al: A comparison of the microstructure and properties of the IPS Empress 2 and the IPS Empress
glass-ceramics, J Biomed Mater Res 53:297–303, 2000.
The KIC value was measured as 3.3 ± 0.3 MPa for IPS Empress 2 and 1.3
± 0.1 MPa for IPS Empress. The authors concluded that IPS Empress
2 can be used to fabricate 3-unit bridges up to the second premolar.
Holm C, Tidehag P, Tillberg A, et al: Longevity and quality of FPDs: A
retrospective study of restorations 30, 20, and 10 years after insertion,
Int J Prosthodont 16:283–289, 2003.
Hulterstrom AK, Bergman M: Polishing systems for dental ceramics, Acta
Odontol Scand 51:229–234, 1993.
Hummel M, Kern M: Durability of the resin bond strength to the alumina ceramic Procera, Dent Mater 20:498–508, 2004.
Irwin GR: Analysis of stresses and strains near the end of a crack traversing a plate, Journal of Applied Mechanics 24:361–364, 1957.
Kappert HF, Krah MK: Keramiken—eine Übersicht, Quintessenz Zahntech 27:668–704, 2001.
An excellent overview of ceramic products in use at the end of the
20th century.
Karl M, Fischer H, Graef F, et al: Structural changes in ceramic veneered
three-unit implant-supported restorations as a consequence of static
and dynamic loading, Dent Mater 24:464–470, 2008.
Kelly JR: Dental ceramics: What is this stuff anyway? J Am Dent Assoc
139(Suppl 4):4S–7S, 2008.
232.e2

Kelly JR: Denry I: Stabilized zirconia as a structural ceramic: An overview, Dent Mater 24:289–298, 2008.
Kelly JR: Nishimura I, Campbell SD. Ceramics in dentistry: Historical
roots and current perspectives, J Prosthet Dent 75:18–32, 1996.
Kelly JR: Rungruanganunt P, Hunter B, et al: Development of a clinically validated bulk failure test for ceramic crowns, J Prosthet Dent
104:228–238, 2010.
Kitayama S, Nikaido T, Takahashi R, et al: Effect of primer treatment on
bonding of resin cements to zirconia ceramic, Dent Mater 26:426–
432, 2010.
Kohorst P, Herzog TJ, Borchers L, et al: Load-bearing capacity of allceramic posterior four-unit fixed partial dentures with different zirconia frameworks, Eur J Oral Sci 115:161–166, 2007.
Kosmač T, Oblak C: Ageing and fatigue behaviour of surface treated
Y-TZP dental ceramics, Key Eng Mate 361-363:817–820, 2008.
Kosmač T, Oblak Č, Jevnikar P, et al: Strength and reliability of surface
treated Y-TZP dental ceramics, J Biomed Mater Res 53:304–313, 2000.
Grinding and sandblasting various Y-TZP ceramics containing 3
mol% yttria revealed that grinding lowered the mean strength and
Weibull modulus, whereas sandblasting provided a powerful method
for strengthening but at the expense of reduced reliability.
Kosmač T, Oblak C, Marion L: The effects of dental grinding and sandblasting on ageing and fatigue behavior of dental zirconia (Y-TZP)
ceramics, J Eur Ceram Soc 28:1085–1090, 2008.
Land C: Porcelain dental arts, Dental Cosmos 45:615–620, 1903.
An historic article describing one of the first ceramic crowns made in
dentistry.
Larsson C, Holm L, Lovgren N, et al: Fracture strength of four-unit
Y-TZP FPD cores designed with varying connector diameter. An invitro study, J Oral Rehabil 34:702–709, 2007.
Lee JJ, Kwon JY, Bhowmick S, et al: Veneer vs. core failure in adhesively
bonded all-ceramic crown layers, J Dent Res 87:363–366, 2008.
Lehmann F, Kern M: Durability of resin bonding to zirconia ceramic
using different primers, J Adhes Dent 11:479–483, 2009.
Lohbauer U, Amberger G, Quinn GD, et al: Fractographic analysis of a
dental zirconia framework: a case study on design issues, J Mech Behav
Biomed Mater 3:623–629, 2010.
Lohbauer U, Kramer N, Petschelt A, et al: Correlation of in vitro fatigue
data and in vivo clinical performance of a glass ceramic material, Dent
Mater 24:39–44, 2008.
Lohbauer U, Petschelt A, Greil P: Lifetime prediction of CAD/CAM
dental ceramics, J Biomed Mater Res 63:780–785, 2002.
Luthardt R, Holzhuter M, Rudolph H, et al: CAD/CAM-machining
effects on Y-TZP zirconia. Dent Mater 20:655–662, 2004.
MacCulloch WT: Advances in dental ceramics, Br Dent J 124:361–365,
1968.
The first description of the use of glass ceramics for dental applications.
Mackert JR, Butts MB, Fairhurst CW: The effect of the leucite transformation on dental porcelain expansion. Dent Mater 2:32–36, 1986.
Mackert JR, Butts MB, Morena R, et al: Phase changes in a leucite-containing dental porcelain frit, J Am Ceram Soc 69:C69–C72, 1986.
The susceptibility of porcelains to phase changes during heat treatment is described.
Mackert JR, Ringle RD, Parry EE, et al: The relationship between oxide
adherence and porcelain-metal bonding, J Dent Res 67:474–478,
1988.
Quality of porcelain bond is dependent on adherence of the metal
oxide.
Malament KA, Socransky SS: Survival of Dicor glass-ceramic dental restorations over 14 years: Part I. Survival of Dicor complete coverage
restorations and effect of internal surface acid etching, tooth position,
gender, and age, J Prosthet Dent 81:23–32, 1999.
Demonstrated greater fracture rates of posterior Dicor crowns, maxillary crowns, crowns in male patients, and crowns in patients between
the ages of 33 and 52 years.
Malament KA, Socransky SS: Survival of Dicor glass-ceramic dental restorations over 16 years. Part III: Effect of luting agent and tooth or
tooth-substitute core structure, J Prosthet Dent 86:511–519, 2001.

Mantri SS, Bhasin AS: CAD/CAM in dental restorations: An overview,
Annals and Essences in Dentistry. II(3):123–128, 2010.
McCabe JF, Carrick TE: A statistical approach to the mechanical testing
of dental materials, Dent Mater 2:139–142, 1986.
Mecholsky JJ Jr: Fractography: determining the sites of fracture initiation, Dent Mater 11:113–116, 1995.
Mecholsky JJ Jr: Fracture mechanics principles, Dent Mater 11:111–112,
1995.
Mitov G, Lohbauer U, Rabbo MA, et al: Investigations of subcritical
crack propagation of the Empress 2 all-ceramic system, Dent Mater
24:267–273, 2008.
Molin MK, Karlsson SL: Five-year clinical prospective evaluation of
zirconia-based Denzir 3-unit FPDs, Int J Prosthodont 21:223–227,
2008.
Morena R, Beaudreau GM, Lockwood PE, et al: Fatigue of dental ceramics in a simulated oral environment, J Dent Res 65:993–997, 1986.
Morena R, Lockwood PE, Evans AL, et al: Toughening of dental porcelain by tetragonal ZrO2 additions, J Am Ceram Soc 69:C75–C77,
1986.
The use of partially stabilized zirconia to increase the toughness of
dental porcelains is explored via a process termed transformation
toughening.
Myers ML, Ergle JW, Fairhurst CW, et al: Fatigue characteristics of a
high-strength porcelain, Int J Prosthodont 7:253–257, 1994.
Myers ML, Ergle JW, Fairhurst CW, et al: Fatigue failure parameters of
IPS-Empress porcelain, Int J Prosthodont 7:549–553, 1994.
Nassau K (editor): The Physics and Chemistry of Color: The Fifteen Causes of
Color. New York, 1983, John Wiley & Sons, pp 1–454.
An excellent review of the principles of color and color perception.
Odman P, Andersson B: Procera AllCeram crowns followed for 5 to 10.5
years: a prospective clinical study, Int J Prosthodont 14:504–509, 2001.
Clinical survival rates of 97.7% and 93.5%, respectively, were reported
for Procera AllCeram crowns after 5 and 10 years, respectively. However, the failure rate after 10 years was 7 percent. Thus, one should
distinguish between the survival rate and failure.
Oilo M, Gjerdet NR, Tvinnereim HM: The firing procedure influences
properties of a zirconia core ceramic, Dent Mater 24:471–475, 2008.
Orowan E: The fatigue of glass under stress, Nature 154:341–343, 1944.
Orowan E: Fracture and strength of solids, Rep Prog Phys 1949;12:185.
Orowan E: Energy criteria of fracture, Weld J Res Suppl 20:157s, 1955.
Ozcan M, Niedermeier W: Clinical study on the reasons for and location
of failures of metal-ceramic restorations and survival of repairs, Int J
Prosthodont 15:299–302, 2002.
These authors report a survival level for repaired metal-ceramic crowns
with previous porcelain fractures of 89% after 3 years.
Pinto MM, Cesar PF, Rosa V, et al: Influence of pH on slow crack growth
of dental porcelains, Dent Mater 24:814–823, 2008.
Pjetursson BE, Sailer I, Zwahlen M, et al: A systematic review of the survival and complication rates of all-ceramic and metal-ceramic reconstructions after an observation period of at least 3 years. Part I: Single
crowns, Clin Oral Implants Res 18(Suppl 3):73–85, 2007.
Quinn GB: Fractography of ceramics and glasses. NIST recommended
practice guide. Special publication 960–916. Washington, DC, 2007,
National Institute of Standards and Technology.
A superb guide to fractography with detailed explanations of experimental procedures.
Quinn GB, Morrell R: Design data for engineering ceramics; a review of
the flexure test, J Am Ceram Soc 74:2037–2066, 1991.
Quinn JB, Quinn GD: A practical and systematic review of Weibull statistics for reporting strengths of dental materials, Dent Mater 26:135–
147, 2009.
Ritter JE: Critique of test methods for lifetime predictions, Dent Mater
11:147–151, 1995.
Ritter JE: Predicting lifetimes of materials and material structures, Dent
Mater 1:142–156, 1995.
Sailer I, Feher A, Filser F, et al: Five-year clinical results of zirconia frameworks for posterior fixed partial dentures, Int J Prosthodont 20:383–
388, 2007.

Salazar Marocho S, Studart A, Bottino M, et al: Mechanical strength and
subcritical crack growth under wet cyclic loading of glass-infiltrated
dental ceramics, Dent Mater 26:483–490, 2009.
Scherrer SS, Cattani-Lorente M, Vittecoq E, et al: Fatigue behavior in
water of Y-TZP zirconia ceramics after abrasion with 30 μm silicacoated alumina particles, Dent Mater 27:e28–e42, 2010.
Scherrer SS, Quinn GD, Quinn JB: Fractographic failure analysis of a
Procera AllCeram crown using stereo and scanning electron microscopy, Dent Mater 24:1107–1113, 2008.
Seghi RR, Denry I, Brajevic F: Effects of ion exchange on hardness and
fracture toughness of dental ceramics, Int J Prosthodont 5:309–314,
1992.
Sjögren G, Molin M, van Dijken J: A 10-year prospective evaluation of
CAD/CAM-manufactured (Cerec) ceramic inlays, Int J Prosthodont
17:241–246, 2004.
Spear F, Holloway J: Which all-ceramic system is optimal for anterior
esthetics? J Am Dent Assoc 139(Suppl 9):19S–24S, 2008.
Studart AR, Filser F, Kocher P, et al: In vitro lifetime of dental ceramics
under cyclic loading in water, Biomaterials 28:2695–2705, 2007.
Suansuwan N, Swain M: Adhesion of porcelain to titanium and a titanium alloy, J Dent 31:509–518, 2003.
Reported maximum marginal discrepancies of 161 μm for In-Ceram
crowns compared with 83 μm and 63 μm for Procera AllCeram and
IPS Empress crowns, respectively.
Suputtamongkol K, Anusavice KJ, Suchatlampong C, et al: Clinical performance and wear characteristics of veneered lithia-disilicate-based
ceramic crowns, Dent Mater 24:667–673, 2008.
Swain MV: Toughening mechanisms for ceramics. Mater Forum 13:237–
253, 1989.
Swain MV: Unstable cracking (chipping) of veneering porcelain on
all-ceramic dental crowns and fixed partial dentures, Acta Biomater
5:1668–1677, 2009.
Taskonak B, Griggs JA, Mecholsky JJ Jr, et al: Analysis of subcritical crack
growth in dental ceramics using fracture mechanics and fractography,
Dent Mater 24:700–707, 2008.
Taskonak B, Yan J, Mecholsky JJ Jr, et al: Fractographic analyses of
zirconia-based fixed partial dentures, Dent Mater 24:1077–1082,
2008.
Teixeira EC, Piascik JR, Stoner BR, et al: Dynamic fatigue and strength
characterization of three ceramic materials, J Mater Sci Mater Med
18:1219–1224, 2007.
Tholey MJ, Swain MV, Hiel N: SEM observations of porcelain Y-TZP
interface, Dent Mater 25:857–862, 2009.
Tinschert J, Natt G, Mautsch W, et al: Fracture resistance of lithium disilicate-, alumina-, and zirconia-based three-unit fixed partial dentures:
A laboratory study, Int J Prosthodont 14:231–238, 2001.
Tinschert J, Natt G, Mautsch W, et al: Marginal fit of alumina and zirconia-based fixed partial dentures produced by a CAD/CAM system,
Oper Dent 26:367–374, 2001.
Tinschert J, Natt G, Mohrbotter N, et al: Lifetime of alumina- and zirconia ceramics used for crown and bridge restorations, J Biomed Mater
Res B 80:317–321, 2007.
Tinschert J, Schulze KA, Natt G, et al: Clinical behavior of zirconiabased fixed partial dentures made of DC-Zirkon: 3-year results, Int J
Prosthodont 21:217–222, 2008.
Tinschert J, Zwez D, Marx R, et al: Structural reliability of alumina-, feldspar-,
leucite-, mica- and zirconia-based ceramics, J Dent 8:529–535, 2000.
Tsalouchou E, Cattell MJ, Knowles JC, et al: Fatigue and fracture properties of yttria partially stabilized zirconia crown systems, Dent Mater
24:308–318, 2007.
Tsitrou EA, Northeast SE, van Noort R: Brittleness index of machinable dental materials and its relation to the marginal chipping factor,
J Dent 35:897–902, 2007.
The machinability of four restorative materials was estimated by calculating their brittleness indexes (BI) and a marginal chipping factor (CF).
Valandro L, Ozcan M, Bottino M, et al: Bond strength of a resin cement
to high alumina and zirconia-reinforced ceramics, J Adhes Dent
8:175–181, 2006.
232.e3

Vergano PJ, Hill DC, Uhlmann DR: Thermal expansion of feldspar
glasses, J Am Ceram Soc 50:59–60, 1967.
One of the first studies that demonstrated the influence of the highexpanding leucite phase on the thermal expansion of feldspar glasses.
Wachtman JB Jr, Capps W, Mandel J: Biaxial flexure test of ceramic substrates, J Mater 7:188–194, 1972.
Wagner WC, Chu TM: Biaxial flexural strength and indentation fracture
toughness of three new dental core ceramics, J Prosthet Dent 76:140–
144, 1996.
Wang H, Aboushelib MN, Feilzer AJ: Strength influencing variables on
CAD/CAM zirconia frameworks, Dent Mater 24:633–638, 2008.
Wassermann A, Kaiser M, Strub JR: Clinical long-term results of VITA
In-Ceram Classic crowns and fixed partial dentures: A systematic literature review, Int J Prosthodont 19:355–363, 2006.
Weibull W: A statistical distribution function of wide applicability, J Appl
Mech 18:290–293, 1951.
Weinstein M, Katz S, Weinstein AB: Fused porcelain-to-metal teeth. US
Patent No. 3. 052:982, September 11, 1962.
One of the major advances in ceramics used for metal-ceramic restorations.
Weinstein M, Weinstein AB: Porcelain-covered metal-reinforced teeth.
US Patent No. 3. 052:983, September 11, 1962.
This patent and the previous patent describe the development of highexpanding porcelains suitable for fusing with dental alloys. These patents
provided the basis for modern metal-ceramic restorations.

232.e4

Wen MY, Mueller HJ, Chai J, et al: Comparative mechanical property
characterization of 3 all-ceramic core materials, Int J Prosthodont
12:534–541, 1999.
Yoshimura HN, Cesar PF, Miranda WG, et al: Fracture toughness of dental porcelains evaluated by IF SCF, and SEPB methods, J Am Ceram
Soc 88:1680–1683, 2005.
Yoshimura HN, Cesar PF, Soki FN, et al: Stress intensity factor
threshold in dental porcelains, J Mater Sci Mater Med 19:1945–
1951, 2008.
Yoshimura HN, Molisani AL, Narita NE, et al: Porosity dependence of
elastic constants in aluminum nitride ceramics, Mater Res 10:127–
133, 2007.
Yoshimura HN, Narita NE, Molisani AL, et al: High temperature flexural
strength and fracture toughness of AlN with Y2O3ceramic, J Mater Sci
44:5773–5780, 2009.
Zhang Y, Lawn B, Rekow E, Thompson V: Effect of sandblasting on
the long-term performance of dental ceramics, J Biomed 71:381–
386, 2004.
Zhu Q, deWith G, Dortmans LJ, et al: Subcritical crack growth behavior of Al2O3-glass dental composites, J Biomed Mater Res B 65:233–
238, 2003.

11

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins
OUTLINE
Acrylic Resins

Physical Properties of Denture Base Resins

General Technique of Denture Base Fabrication

Biological Properties of Denture Base Resins

Heat-Activated Denture Base Resins

Additional Procedures Associated With Dentures

CAD-CAM Procedures in Denture Base Fabrication

Resin Teeth for Prosthetic Applications

Chemical-Activated Denture Base Resins

Materials for Maxillofacial Prosthetics

Light-Activated Denture Base Resins

KEY TERMS
Denture liner The polymeric material used to replace the tissuecontacting (intaglio) surface of an existing denture. A denture
liner may be hard or soft, short or long term.
Long-term resilient soft liner A resilient polymeric material that
is bonded to the tissue-contacting surface of a denture for
cushioning and/or improved retention. Such liners typically are
heat-processed, and thus, they are more durable than chemicalactivated, short-term soft liners and tissue conditioners.
Rebasing The process of replacing the entire denture base of an
existing complete or partial denture.
Relining The process of replacing the tissue-contacting surface of
an existing denture.
Resilient soft denture liner A polymeric material that is placed
on the tissue-contacting surface of a denture base to absorb

some of the mastication impact energy by acting as a type of
“shock absorber” between the occlusal surfaces of a denture
and the underlying oral tissues. A denture soft liner may also
be used to engage natural or prosthetic undercuts so as to
provide retention, stability, and support. These materials
may be placed chairside (directly) or in the dental laboratory
(indirectly).
Short-term soft liner (tissue conditioner) A resilient polymeric
material that is employed for brief periods (up to 14 days) to absorb masticatory impact and adapt to changing ridge contours
(e.g., following the extraction of teeth or surgical alteration of
an edentulous or partially edentulous ridge). Such materials
are typically chemical-activated polymers and tend to degrade
more rapidly than heat-activated resins.

The Glossary of Prosthodontic Terms, 9th edition, defines a complete denture as a removable dental prosthesis that replaces
the entire dentition and associated structures of the maxilla
or mandible. Such a prosthesis is composed of artificial teeth
attached to a denture base. In turn, the denture base derives its
support through contact with the oral tissues, teeth, or dental
implants.
Although individual denture bases can be formed from metals or ceramics, the majority of denture bases are fabricated using
common polymers. Such polymers are chosen based on availability, dimensional stability, handling characteristics, color, and compatibility with oral tissues.
A description of commonly used denture base polymers is
presented in this chapter. Considerable attention is given to individual processing systems and polymerization techniques. In addition, methods for improving the fit and dimensional stability of
resin-based prostheses are provided.

Acrylic Resins
Since the mid-1940s, the majority of denture bases have been
fabricated using poly(methyl methacrylate) resins, also known as
PMMA. PMMA is a colorless transparent solid that can be tinted
with pigments, dyes, fillers, and fibers to provide almost any color,
shade, and degree of translucency. The color, optical characteristics, and dimensional properties of PMMA remain stable under
normal intraoral conditions, and its physical properties have
proven to be adequate for dental applications.
One decided advantage of PMMA is the relative ease with which
this material can be processed. PMMA denture base material is
commonly supplied as a powder–liquid system (Figure 11-1). The
liquid contains mostly methyl methacrylate monomers, di- or trimethacrylate crosslinking agents (Figure 11-2), and an inhibitor,
and the powder contains predominantly PMMA resin in the form
of micro-sized beads (or spheres). When the liquid and powder

233

234

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

are mixed in the proper proportions, a workable mass is formed.
The material is introduced into a properly formed mold cavity
and polymerized under heat and pressure. Recall from Chapter 2,
Chemistry of Polymerization, that polymerization can be activated by chemical, heat, and light energy. Microwave energy may
also be used for polymerization. In addition, computer-aided

design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD-CAM) technologies of milling PMMA pucks and three-dimensional (3-D) printing using methacrylate-based monomers (Chapter 15, Additive
Manufacturing—3D printing) are also available.

General Technique of Denture Base
Fabrication

• Figure 11-1 A representative heat-activated resin. The majority of heatactivated resins are supplied as powder–liquid systems. (Courtesy Lang
Dental Mfg. Co., Inc., Wheeling, IL.)

Methyl
methacrylate

Glycol
dimethacrylate

Several processing techniques are available for the fabrication of
denture bases (Figures 11-3 to 11-11). Each technique requires
a suitable impression of the associated dental arch, followed by
the fabrication of an accurate gypsum cast. In turn, a resin record
base is fabricated on the cast. Wax is added to the record base, and
prosthetic teeth are positioned in the wax (Figure 11-3, A). The
prosthetic teeth are related to the opposing dentition and evaluated in the patient’s mouth before proceeding.
In the laboratory, a bronze denture flask is used, and the
completed tooth arrangement is encased in a suitable investing
medium (usually gypsum). A plastic denture flask is mandatory
if microwave energy is used. Subsequently, the denture flask is
opened, and the wax denture base is eliminated in a hot-water
bath, leaving the prosthetic teeth in place. After a thorough cleansing of the mold, an appropriate separator is applied to the gypsum surface. In turn, a resin denture base material is introduced
into the mold cavity and polymerized under pressure. Following
polymerization, the denture is recovered and prepared for clinical
placement.
Not all denture base processing requires flasks. When light-activated resin or CAD-CAM processing is used, no flask is needed.
In this chapter, we will discuss commonly available denture base
materials and the properties and additional applications of denture base resins.

Crosslinked poly(methyl methacrylate)

Activator
Initiator

• Figure 11-2 Chemical basis for the formation of crosslinked poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). Glycol
dimethacrylate is incorporated into PMMA chains and may “bridge” or “interconnect” such chains.

CHAPTER 11

A

B

C

D

E

F

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

235

• Figure 11-3 Steps in mold preparation (compression molding technique). A, Completed tooth arrangement prepared for flasking process. B, Master cast embedded in properly contoured dental gypsum.
C, Occlusal and incisal surfaces of the prosthetic teeth are exposed to facilitate subsequent denture recovery. D, Fully flasked complete maxillary denture. E, Separation of flask segments during wax-elimination
process. F, Placement of alginate-based separating medium.

Heat-Activated Denture Base Resins
Heat-activated materials are used in the fabrication of nearly all
denture bases. The use of heat-activated polymers involves the
preparation of a gypsum mold for compression molding, preparation of denture base resin, and a thermal polymerization using a
water bath or microwave oven.

Compression Molding Technique
As a rule, heat-activated denture base resins are shaped via compression molding. Therefore the compression molding technique
is described in detail in the following subsections.

Preparation of the Mold
Before mold preparation, prosthetic teeth must be selected and
arranged in a manner that will fulfill both esthetic and functional
requirements. In turn, the completed tooth arrangement is sealed
to the master gypsum cast.
At this stage, the master cast and completed tooth arrangement are removed from the dental articulator (Figure 11-3, A).
The master cast is coated with a thin layer of separator to prevent
adherence of dental gypsum to the master cast during the flasking process. The lower half of a denture flask is filled with freshly
mixed gypsum, and the master cast is placed into this mixture.
The gypsum is contoured to facilitate wax elimination, packing,
and deflasking procedures (Figure 11-3, B). Upon reaching the
initial set, the gypsum surfaces are coated with an appropriate
separator.
The upper half of the selected denture flask is then positioned
atop the lower half of the flask. A surface-tension–reducing agent
is applied to exposed wax surfaces, and a second mix of dental
gypsum is prepared. This increment of gypsum is poured into
the denture flask. Care must be taken to ensure that the investing

material achieves intimate contact with all external surfaces of the
mounted teeth. The investing gypsum is added until all surfaces of
the tooth arrangement and denture base are completely covered.
Incisal and occlusal surfaces are minimally exposed to facilitate
subsequent deflasking (Figure 11-3, C). The gypsum is then permitted to set and is coated with a colorless separator.
At this point, an additional increment of gypsum is mixed, and
the remainder of the flask is filled. The lid of the flask is gently
seated, and the gypsum is allowed to harden (Figure 11-3, D).
After the gypsum has hardened, the record base and wax must
be removed from the mold. To accomplish this task, the denture
flask is immersed in boiling water for 4 minutes. The flask is
then removed from the water, and the appropriate segments are
separated. The record base and softened wax remain in the lower
half of the denture flask, while the prosthetic teeth remain firmly
embedded in the investing gypsum of the remaining segment
(Figure 11-3, E). The record base and softened wax are carefully
removed from the surface of the mold. Residual wax is removed
from the mold cavity using wax solvent. The mold cavity is subsequently cleaned with a mild detergent solution and rinsed with
boiling water.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What is the purpose of a separating medium that is used during denture base
fabrication? What is the chemical basis for popular separating media?

Selection and Application of a Separating Medium
The next step in denture base fabrication involves the application of an appropriate separating medium onto the surfaces of
the mold cavity. This medium prevents direct contact between
the denture base resin and the mold surface. Failure to place an
appropriate separating medium can lead to two major difficulties:
(1) If water is permitted to diffuse into the denture base resin, the

236

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

moisture can affect the polymerization rate and the optical and
physical properties of the resultant denture base. (2) If dissolved
polymer or free monomer soaks into the mold surface, portions of
the investing medium can fuse to the denture base, affecting the
physical and esthetic properties of processed denture bases.
Currently, the most popular separating agents are water-soluble
colloidal alginate solutions. When applied to gypsum surfaces, these
solutions produce thin, relatively insoluble calcium alginate films.
These films prevent direct contact of denture base resins and the surrounding dental gypsum.
A small amount of separator is dispensed into a disposable
container. Then, a fine brush is used to apply the separating
medium onto the exposed surfaces of a warm, clean gypsum mold
(Figure 11-3, F). Separator should not contact the exposed portions of acrylic resin teeth because the separator interferes with
chemical bonding between acrylic resin teeth and denture base
resins. Subsequently, the mold sections are oriented to prevent
“pooling” of separator and permitted to dry.

results in shrinkage. Research indicates that the polymerization
of methyl methacrylate monomers to form PMMA yields a 21%
decrease in the volume of material. To minimize dimensional
changes, resin manufacturers incorporate a significant fraction of
polymer beads, like the fillers added in resin-based composites.
When the powder and liquid components are mixed in the
proper proportions, a doughlike mass results. Commercial products generally exhibit a polymer-to-monomer ratio of approximately 3:1 by volume. This ratio provides sufficient monomer to
thoroughly wet the polymer beads but does not contribute excess
monomer that would produce increased polymerization shrinkage. Using a 3:1 ratio, the volumetric shrinkage can be limited to
approximately 7% (about 2.3% linear shrinkage). Polymerization
shrinkage is compensated by the initial setting expansion of the
gypsum mold and swelling of the polymerized acrylic resin upon
exposure to water in the denture flask and in clinical service. Consequently, the completed prosthesis displays little dimensional
change.

Preparation of Heat-Activated Denture Resin

CRITICAL QUESTIONS

As previously noted, most PMMA resin systems include powder
and liquid components (Figure 11-1). The powder consists of
spheres of PMMA, other copolymer, and a small amount of benzoyl peroxide, termed the initiator. Upon heating, the benzoyl peroxide generates free radicals, which are responsible for initiating
polymerization. The liquid is predominantly methyl methacrylate
monomer with small amounts of hydroquinone, as an inhibitor
to prevent untimely polymerization of the liquid during storage. Inhibitors also retard the curing process and thereby increase
working time.
Crosslinking agents, such as glycol dimethacrylate, may be
added to the liquid. Glycol dimethacrylate is chemically and structurally similar to methyl methacrylate and can be incorporated
into growing methyl methacrylate polymer chains (Figure 11-2).
It is important to note that methyl methacrylate possesses one carbon-carbon double bond per molecule, and glycol dimethacrylate
possesses two double bonds per molecule. As a result, an individual molecule of glycol dimethacrylate may serve as a “bridge” or
“cross-member” linking two growing polymer chains. If sufficient
glycol dimethacrylate is included in the mixture, numerous interconnections may be formed. These interconnections yield a netlike structure that provides resistance to deformation and solvent
swelling that may be caused by exposure to ethanol in the diet.
Crosslinking agents are incorporated into the liquid component
at a concentration of 1% to 2% by volume.

What are the five physical stages through which properly mixed denture base
resins pass? During which stage should compression molding be initiated?

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Why do denture base resin systems contain polymer beads? How does the
inclusion of polymer beads affect volumetric shrinkage?

Polymer-to-Monomer Ratio
A proper polymer-to-monomer ratio is important in the fabrication of well-fitting denture bases with desirable physical properties. Unfortunately, most discussions of the polymer-to-monomer
ratio provide little practical information for dental personnel.
Furthermore, these discussions do not address the relationships
between molecular events and the gross handling characteristics
of denture base resins.
As discussed in Chapter 5, Composition and Function, on
resin-based composites, the polymerization of denture base resins

Polymer-Monomer Interaction
When monomer and polymer are mixed in the proper proportions, a workable mass is produced. Upon standing, without subjecting to heat for initiation of polymerization, the resultant mass
passes through five distinct stages. These stages can be described
as (1) sandy, (2) stringy, (3) doughlike, (4) rubbery or elastic, and
(5) stiff.
During the sandy stage, little or no interaction occurs on a molecular level. Polymer beads remain unaltered, and the consistency of
the mixture can be described as “coarse” or “grainy.” Later, the mixture enters a stringy stage when the monomer attacks the surfaces
of individual polymer beads and is absorbed into the beads, causing
swelling of the beads and dissolution of these non-crosslinked polymer chains into the liquid monomer. These polymer chains uncoil,
thereby increasing the viscosity of the mix. This stage is characterized by “stringiness” or “stickiness” when the material is touched or
drawn apart.
Subsequently, the mass enters a doughlike stage. On a molecular level, an increased number of polymer chains enter the solution. The mixture may be envisioned as polymeric strands within a
volume of liquid monomer. (Visualize strands of cooked spaghetti
in a pot containing water.) Clinically, the mass behaves as a pliable
dough. It is no longer tacky and does not adhere to the surfaces
of the mixing vessel or spatula. This is the ideal consistency for
compression molding. As a result, the material should be introduced into the mold cavity during the latter phases of the doughlike stage.
Following the doughlike stage, the mixture enters a rubbery
or elastic stage. This is because some monomer is dissipated by
evaporation, and some penetrates further into remaining polymer
beads. The mass rebounds when compressed or stretched. Because
the mass no longer flows freely to assume the shape of its container, the rubbery acrylic is not moldable by conventional compression techniques.
Upon standing for an extended period, the mixture becomes
stiff. This is the result of the evaporation of unreacted monomer.
From a clinical standpoint, the mixture appears dry and is resistant to mechanical deformation.

CHAPTER 11

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

237

• Figure 11-4 Steps in resin packing (compression-molding technique). A, Properly mixed resin is bent
into a horseshoe shape and placed into the mold cavity. B, The flask assembly is placed into a flask press,
and pressure is applied. C, Excess material is carefully removed from the flask. D, The flask is transferred
to a flask carrier, which maintains pressure on the assembly during processing.

Dough-Forming Time
The time required for the resin mixture to reach a doughlike stage
is termed the dough-forming time. American National Standards
Institute/American Dental Association (ANSI/ADA) Standard
No. 139—Dental Base polymers: 2020 (ISO 20795-1:2013
Dentistry—Base polymers—Part 1: Denture base polymers)
requires that this consistency be attained in less than 40 minutes
from the start of the mixing process. In clinical use, the majority
of denture base products reach a doughlike consistency in less
than 10 minutes.
Working Time
Working time is defined as the time a denture base material remains
in the doughlike stage. This period is critical to the compression
molding process. ANSI/ADA Standard No. 139 requires the
dough to remain moldable for at least 5 minutes.
Ambient temperature affects the working time. Hence the
working time of a denture resin can be extended via refrigeration.
A significant drawback associated with this technique is that moisture may condense on the resin when it is exposed to ambient air.
The presence of moisture may degrade the physical and esthetic
properties of a processed resin. Moisture contamination can be
avoided by storing the resin in an airtight container. Following
removal from the refrigerator, the container should not be opened
until it reaches room temperature.

Packing
The introduction of denture base resin into the mold cavity
is termed packing. This process represents critical steps in denture base fabrication. While in a doughlike state, the resin is
removed from its mixing container and rolled into a cylindrical
form. Monomer is painted over the necks of the denture teeth
to promote bonding to the denture base. Subsequently, the resin
form is bent into a horseshoe shape and placed into the portion of
the flask that houses the prosthetic teeth (Figure 11-4, A). A thin
polyethylene packing sheet is placed over the master cast, and the
flask is reassembled.
The flask assembly is placed into a press, and pressure is applied
incrementally (Figure 11-4, B). Slow application of pressure permits the resin dough to flow uniformly throughout the mold
space. The application of pressure is continued until the denture
flask is fully closed. In turn, the flask is opened, and the polyethylene packing sheet is removed from the surface of the resin with
a rapid, sustained tug.
Excess resin will be found on the relatively flat areas surrounding the mold cavity. This excess resin is called flash. Using
a rounded instrument, the flash is carefully teased away from the
body of resin that occupies the mold cavity (Figure 11-4, C). Care
is taken not to chip the gypsum surfaces of the mold. Pieces of
gypsum that have become dislodged must be removed so that they
are not incorporated into the processed denture base.

238

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

placed into a water bath for polymerization of the denture base
resin if a heat-curing resin is used. Upon completion, the denture
is recovered, adjusted, finished, and polished.
Currently, there is some debate regarding the comparative
accuracy of denture bases fabricated by compression molding and
those fabricated by injection molding. Available data and clinical information indicate that denture bases fabricated by injection
molding can provide slightly improved clinical accuracy.

Polymerization Procedure
During denture base fabrication, heat is applied to the resin by
immersing the denture flask and flask carrier in a water bath. The
water is heated to a prescribed temperature and maintained at that
temperature for a period suggested by the manufacturer.

Temperature Rise
The polymerization of denture base resins is exothermic, and the
amount of heat evolved can affect the properties of processed denture bases. Representative temperature changes occurring in water,
investing gypsum, and resin are presented in Figure 11-7. The temperature profile of the investing gypsum closely parallels the heating curve for the water. The temperature of the denture base resin
lags somewhat during the initial stages of the heating process. This
is caused by the fact that the resin occupies a position in the center
of the mold, and therefore, heat penetration takes longer.
As the denture base resin rises slightly above 70 °C, the temperature of the resin begins to increase rapidly. In turn, the
decomposition rate of benzoyl peroxide is significantly increased.
This sequence of events leads to an increased rate of polymerization
and an accompanying increase in the exothermic heat of reaction.
• Figure 11-5 A cross-sectional representation of the denture flask and

CRITICAL QUESTIONS

its contents.

What causes porosity in denture bases? How can these defects be minimized?

A fresh polyethylene packing sheet is placed between the major
portions of the flask, and the flask assembly is once again placed in
the press. Trial closures are repeated until minimal flash is observed.
At this stage, the mold is closed for the last time with no packing sheet interposed. The mold sections are aligned and placed
in the flask press. Again, pressure is incrementally applied. Following definitive closure, the flask is transferred to a flask carrier
(Figure 11-4, D), which maintains pressure on the flask assembly
during denture base processing. A cross-sectional representation
of the denture flask assembly is presented in Figure 11-5.

Polymerization Cycle
Controlled heating processes are used to guide the polymerization
of heat-activated denture bases. Such heating processes are termed
polymerization cycles or curing cycles. The relationship between the
heating rate and temperature rise within the denture base resin is
illustrated in Figure 11-8. The polymerization cycle represented
by curve C probably would yield porosity in thick portions of the
denture because the temperature of the resin exceeds the boiling
point of the monomer (100.8 °C). On the other hand, the polymerization cycle represented by curve A probably would result in the
presence of residual monomer because the resin temperature does
not reach the boiling temperature of the monomer. To minimize
the likelihood of undesirable outcomes, carefully controlled heating cycles have been developed.
One technique involves processing the denture base resin in a
constant-temperature water bath at 74 °C (165 °F) for 8 hours or
longer, with no terminal boiling treatment. A second technique
consists of processing in a 74 °C water bath for 8 hours, and then
increasing the temperature to 100 °C for 1 hour. A third technique
involves processing the resin at 74 °C for approximately 2 hours and
increasing the temperature of the water bath to 100 °C and processing for 1 hour. All techniques are commonly used and equally
effective.
Following completion of the chosen polymerization cycle, the
denture flask should be permitted to cool to room temperature.
Rapid cooling can result in distortion of the denture base because

Injection Molding Technique
In addition to the compression molding techniques, denture bases
can be fabricated via injection molding using specially designed
flasks. One half of the flask is filled with freshly mixed gypsum, and
the master cast is settled into this mixture. The gypsum is appropriately contoured and permitted to set. Subsequently, sprues or
ingates are attached to the wax denture base to introduce resin during the injection-molding process (Figure 11-6, A). The remaining half of the flask is positioned, and the investment process is
completed (Figure 11-6, B). Wax elimination is performed as previously described (Figure 11-6, C), and the flask is reassembled.
Subsequently, the flask is placed into a carrier that maintains pressure on the assembly during resin introduction and processing.
Upon completion of the foregoing steps, resin is mixed and
injected into the mold cavity (Figure 11-6, D). The flask is then

CHAPTER 11

A

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

239

B

D

C

• Figure 11-6 Steps in mold preparation (injection molding technique). A, Placement of sprues for introduction of resin. B, Occlusal and incisal surfaces of the prosthetic teeth are exposed to facilitate denture
recovery. C, Separation of flask segments during wax-elimination process. D, Injection of resin and placement of assembly into water bath.

of differences in the thermal contraction of resin and investing gypsum. To minimize potential difficulties, the flask should be removed
from the water and bench-cooled for 30 minutes. Subsequently, the
flask should be immersed in cool tap water for 15 minutes. The denture base may then be deflasked and prepared for delivery. To decrease
the probability of unfavorable dimensional changes, the denture
should be stored in water until the clinical fitting appointment.

Polymerization via Microwave Energy
PMMA resin may be polymerized using microwave energy because
the methyl methacrylate molecule is asymmetrical and therefore
“lossy.” This technique employs a specially formulated resin and
a nonmetallic flask (Figure 11-9). A conventional 1100-watt,
24-GHz microwave oven is used to supply the thermal energy
required for polymerization.
The major advantage of this technique is the speed with which
polymerization may be accomplished. Despite the decreased processing time, overheating can occur in thick sections, causing the
monomer to boil and yielding porosity. It should also be noted
that although the polymerization time is reduced, the required
technician time is unaffected. Available information indicates
that the physical properties of microwave resins are comparable
to those of conventional resins. Furthermore, the fit of denture
bases polymerized using microwave energy is comparable to those
processed via conventional compression molding techniques.

CAD-CAM Procedures in Denture Base
Fabrication
Although the first CAM software program was developed by
Dr. Patrick Hanratty in the 1950s, it was not until the 1990s
that CAD-CAM technologies were used to generate complete
dentures. The first English-language account of computeraided technology in the fabrication of complete dentures was
published by Maeda et al. in 1994. The authors employed stereolithography to generate complete dentures in a proof-ofconcept effort. Beginning in 1995, Goodacre employed a series
of procedures intended to facilitate the fabrication of complete
dentures using subtractive techniques. In the ensuing years,
Kawahata et al. and Kanazawa et al. used computer numerical
control (CNC) milling to advance and refine previous efforts.
CNC is an automated control of machining and 3-D printers
by means of a computer. In 2012, Goodacre et al. published
the first clinical account of CAD-CAM dentures milled from
prepolymerized PMMA.
Advantages associated with CAD-CAM fabrication of complete dentures include enhanced material properties and improved
dimensional stability of the resultant prostheses. PMMA “pucks”
are fabricated at increased pressures and under strictly controlled
thermal conditions. Consequently, these materials display decreased
porosity, increased polymerization, and a diminished residual

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

monomer content. Moreover, the prepolymerized resins used in
current subtractive processes are approximately 8% more dense
than their conventionally processed counterparts. These factors are
likely to yield enhanced clinical performance and decreased surface
colonization by undesirable species such as Candida albicans.
Machining of prepolymerized PMMA specimens also affects the
clinical adaptation and the dimensional stability of completed denture bases. As previously noted, dentures fabricated via compression-molding techniques are subject to polymerization shrinkage
during the fabrication process. In addition, compression-molded

140

Acrylic

100

120

80

C
B

100

Water

Temperature (°C)

Temperature (°C)

120

prostheses are susceptible to distortion upon recovery from the
mold. Corresponding changes are not observed in machined specimens because polymerization shrinkage and stress relaxation occur
before the machining process. As a result, milled denture bases
exhibit improved adaptation to the underlying ridges upon clinical
placement and are less susceptible to distortion because relaxation
has occurred prior to the machining process.
Currently, the most common CAD-CAM techniques for the
fabrication of complete dentures employ milling technologies.
Clinicians are responsible for accurately capturing the anatomical ridge forms, identifying critical landmarks (e.g., incisal edge
position, facial midline, lip line, etc.), recording desired ridge/
arch relationships, and determining appropriate tooth shades and
forms. This information is transferred to the dental laboratory
or manufacturer responsible for prosthesis fabrication. Design is
accomplished in a virtual environment (CAD) and subsequently
exported to a milling device for production (CAM).

60
Investing gypsum (plaster)
40

A

Wa
ter

240

80

ter
Wa

60

40

20

20
0

20

40

60

80

0

100

ing plaster, and acrylic resin during the polymerization of a 25.4-mm cube
of denture resin. (Modified from Tuckfield WJ, Worner HK, Guerin BD:
Acrylic resins in dentistry. Aust Dent J, 47:119–121, 1943. Reproduced
with permission from the Australian Dental Journal.)

A

40

60

80

100

120

3 hrs.

Heating time (min)

Time of heating (min)

• Figure 11-7 Temperature–time heating curves for the water bath, invest-

20

• Figure 11-8 Temperature changes in acrylic resin when subjected to
various curing schedules. Curve A temperature rose to 100 °C in 3 hours,
curve B temperature rose to 100 °C in 40 minutes, and curve C began at
100 °C. (Modified from Tuckfield WJ, Worner HK, Guerin BD: Acrylic resins
in dentistry. Aust Dent J, 47:119–121, 1943. Reproduced with permission
from the Australian Dental Journal.)

B
• Figure 11-9 A representative microwave-activated resin system. A, Nonmetallic flask. B, Powder and
liquid components of the resin. (Courtesy GC America, Inc., Alsip, IL.)

CHAPTER 11

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

241

In the existing environment, dominant systems employ twocomponent manufacturing processes. The required denture base
is manufactured as one component, and the corresponding teeth
are manufactured as a separate yet continuous monolithic component. The denture base and tooth forms may be joined in a variety
of ways, and the prosthesis is finished, polished, and prepared for
clinical placement.

polymerized via chemical activation generally display 3% to 5%
free monomer, whereas heat-activated resins exhibit 0.2% to 0.5%
free monomer. Therefore it is important that the polymerization
of chemical-activated resins be as complete as possible. Failure to
achieve a high degree of polymerization will predispose the denture
base to dimensional instability and can lead to tissue irritation.

Critical Question

Heat-Activated Versus Chemical-Activated
Denture Base

What are the benefits associated with the chemical-activated processes
compared with heat-activated processes?

Chemical-Activated Denture Base Resins
The same initiator used in heat-activated denture base resin can
also be activated by a tertiary amine, such as dimethyl-para-toluidine. The tertiary amine may be added to the liquid monomer.
Upon mixing liquid and powder components, the tertiary amine
causes decomposition of the benzoyl peroxide contained in the
powder. As a result, free radicals are produced, and polymerization
progresses in a manner similar to that described for heat-activated
systems. Chemical activation does not require the application of
thermal energy and can be completed at room temperature. For
this reason, chemical-activated resins often are referred to as coldcuring, self-curing, or autopolymerizing resins.

Technical Considerations
The powder and liquid components are mixed according to the
manufacturer’s directions and permitted to attain a doughlike
consistency. The working time for chemical-activated resins is
shorter than that for heat-activated materials. Therefore special
attention must be paid to the consistency of the material and rate
of polymerization.
A lengthy initiation period is desirable because this provides
adequate time for trial closures of the denture flask. One method
for prolonging the initiation period is to decrease the temperature
of the resin mass. This may be accomplished by refrigerating the
liquid component and/or the mixing vessel before the mixing process. When the powder and liquid are mixed, the polymerization
process is slowed, the resin mass remains in a doughy stage for an
extended period, and the working time is prolonged.
Mold preparation and resin packing are accomplished in the
same manner described for heat-activated resins. In cases of chemical-activated resins with minimal working times, it is doubtful
that more than two trial closures can be made. Therefore extreme
care must be taken to ensure that a proper amount of resin is
employed, and a minimal number of trial closures are needed.

Processing Considerations
Following definitive closure of the denture flask, pressure must
be maintained throughout the polymerization process. The time
required for polymerization will vary with the material chosen.
Initial hardening of the resin generally will occur within
30 minutes, but polymerization continues for an extended period.
To ensure sufficient polymerization, the flask should be held under
pressure for a minimum of 3 hours.
The polymerization of chemical-activated resins is never as
complete as the polymerization of heat-activated materials. Resins

The residual monomer in chemical-activated denture base materials creates two difficulties. First, the residual monomer acts
as a plasticizer, resulting in decreased transverse strength of the
denture resin. Second, the residual monomer serves as a potential
tissue irritant, thereby compromising the biocompatibility of the
denture base.
From a physical standpoint, chemical-activated resins display
slightly less shrinkage than their heat-activated counterparts.
This imparts greater dimensional accuracy to chemical-activated
resins.
The color stability of chemical-activated resins generally
is inferior to the color stability of heat-activated resins. This
property is related to the presence of tertiary amines within the
chemical-activated resins. Such amines are susceptible to oxidation and accompanying color changes that affect the appearance
of the resin. Discoloration of these resins can be minimized via
the addition of stabilizing agents that prevent such oxidation.

Fluid-Resin Technique
The fluid-resin technique employs a pourable, chemical-activated
resin for the fabrication of denture bases. When mixed in the
proper proportions, a low-viscosity resin is produced. This resin
is poured into a mold cavity, subjected to increased atmospheric
pressure, and allowed to polymerize at ambient temperature. Laboratory aspects of the fluid-resin technique are described in the
following paragraphs.
Tooth arrangement is accomplished using accepted prosthodontic principles. The completed tooth arrangement is then
sealed to the underlying master cast and placed in a specially
designed flask (Figure 11-10, A). The flask is filled with a reversible hydrocolloid-based investment medium, and the assembly is
cooled. Following gelation of the hydrocolloid, the master cast
with the attached tooth arrangement is removed from the flask
(Figure 11-10, B). At this stage, sprues and vents are cut from the
external surface of the flask to the mold cavity (Figure 11-10, C).
Wax is eliminated from the cast using water. The prosthetic
teeth are retrieved and carefully seated in their respective positions within the hydrocolloid investing medium. Subsequently,
the master cast is returned to its position within the mold
(Figure 11-10, D).
The resin is mixed according to the manufacturer’s directions
and poured into the mold via the sprue channels (Figure 11-10, E).
The flask is then placed in a pressurized chamber (i.e., a pressure
pot) at room temperature, and the resin is permitted to polymerize.
According to available information, only 30 to 45 min are required
for polymerization. Nevertheless, a longer period is recommended.
Following completion of the polymerization process, the denture is retrieved from the flask (Figure 11-10, F), and the sprues
are removed. The denture/cast assembly is returned to the dental
articulator for correction of processing changes. Subsequently, the

242

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

A

B

C

D

E

F

• Figure 11-10 Steps in mold preparation (fluid-resin technique). A, Completed tooth arrangement
positioned in a fluid-resin flask. B, Removal of tooth arrangement from reversible hydrocolloid investment.
C, Preparation of sprues and vents for the introduction of resin. D, Repositioning of the prosthetic teeth
and master cast. E, Introduction of pour-type resin. F, Recovery of the completed prosthesis.

denture base is finished and polished. At this stage, the denture
should be stored in water to prevent dehydration and distortion.
Advantages claimed for the fluid-resin technique include (1)
improved adaptation to underlying soft tissues; (2) decreased probability of damage to prosthetic teeth and denture bases during
deflasking; (3) reduced material costs; and (4) simplification of the
flasking, deflasking, and finishing procedures.
Potential disadvantages of the fluid-resin technique include (1)
noticeable shifting of prosthetic teeth during processing, (2) air
entrapment within the denture base material, (3) poor bonding
between the denture base material and acrylic resin teeth, and (4)
technique sensitivity.
In general, denture bases fabricated in this manner exhibit
physical properties that are somewhat inferior to those of conventional heat-processed resins. Nonetheless, clinically acceptable
dentures can be obtained using fluid resins.

Light-Activated Denture Base Resins
Light-activated denture base resins have been described as resinbased composites having matrices of urethane dimethacrylate
(UDMA; Figure 5-2), microfine silica, and high-molecular-weight
acrylic resin monomers. Acrylic resin beads are included as organic
fillers. Blue light is the activator, and a photosensitizing agent such
as camphorquinone serves as the initiator for polymerization. Single-component denture base resins are supplied in sheet and rope
forms and are packed in lightproof pouches to prevent inadvertent
polymerization (Figure 11-11, A). The most recent generation of
light-activated denture base resins consists of three distinct components: (1) a base-forming resin, (2) a tooth-setting resin, and (3)
a contouring resin.
A light-activated resin cannot be flasked in a conventional
manner because opaque investing media prevent the penetration
of light. Instead, a definitive prosthesis is sculpted on the master cast using the aforementioned resins (Figure 11-11, B). The

base-forming resin is first adapted to the master cast and cured
in a high-intensity light chamber (Figure 11-11, C). Subsequently,
the tooth-setting resin is used to attach the prosthetic teeth to the
polymerized base and placed in the light chamber to polymerize
the tooth-setting resin, thereby maintaining prosthetic teeth in the
desired positions. Next, a contouring resin is used to generate the
desired surface anatomy. The resultant prosthesis (Figure 11-11, B)
is placed into the light chamber to complete the process of denture
base fabrication. The denture is then removed from the cast, finished, and polished in a conventional manner.

Physical Properties of Denture Base Resins
The physical properties of denture base resins are critical to the
fit and function of removable dental prostheses. Characteristics
of interest include polymerization shrinkage, porosity, water
sorption, solubility, processing stresses, and crazing. These characteristics are addressed in the following sections.

Polymerization Shrinkage
When methyl methacrylate monomer is polymerized to form
PMMA, the density of the mass changes from 0.94 to 1.19 g/cm3.
This change in density results in a volumetric shrinkage of 21%.
When a conventional heat-activated resin is mixed at the suggested
powder-to-liquid ratio, about one third of the mass is liquid monomer. The remainder of the mass is PMMA beads. Consequently, the
volumetric shrinkage exhibited by the polymerized mass should be
approximately 7%. This figure agrees with values observed in laboratory and clinical investigations.

Critical Question
Why is the relatively high volumetric shrinkage of a denture base resin not
usually considered a significant clinical problem?

CHAPTER 11

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

243

A

B

C

• Figure 11-11 Steps in denture fabrication (light-activated denture base resins). A, Representative lightactivated denture base resin. Sheet and rope forms are supplied in light-proof pouches to prevent inadvertent polymerization. B, Teeth are arranged, and the denture base is sculpted using light-activated resin. C,
The denture base is placed into a light chamber and polymerized according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. (Parts A and C courtesy Densply International, York, PA.)

There are several possible reasons a material exhibiting high
volumetric shrinkage can be used to produce clinically satisfactory
denture bases. In addition to volumetric shrinkage, one also must
consider the effects of linear shrinkage. Linear shrinkage exerts significant effects upon denture base adaptation and cuspal interdigitation.
Based on a projected volumetric shrinkage of 7%, an acrylic resin
denture base should exhibit a linear shrinkage of 2.3 %, approximately {1/3} the value of the volumetric shrinkage. In reality, linear
shrinkage within a denture base rarely exceeds 1% (Table 11-1).
Examination of the polymerization process indicates that
thermal shrinkage of resin is primarily responsible for the linear
changes observed in heat-activated systems. During the initial
stages of the cooling process, the resin remains relatively soft. Consequently, the resin mass contracts at about the same rate as the
surrounding gypsum.

TABLE 11-1

Polymerization Shrinkage of Maxillary
Denture Bases

Material

Linear Shrinkage (%)

High-impact acrylic resin

0.12

Vinyl acrylic resin

0.33

Conventional acrylic resin

0.43

Pour-type acrylic resin

0.48

Rapid heat-cured acrylic resin

0.97

Data from Stafford GD, Bates JF, Huggett R, Handley RW: A review of the properties of
some denture base polymers. J Dent 8:292, 1960.

244

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

A

B

C

D
• Figure 11-12 Dimensional changes resulting from polymerization. A, Chemical-activated resin, pour
technique. B, Microwave resin, compression molding. C, Conventional heat-activated resin, compression
molding. D, Heat-activated resin, injection molding. (Demonstration and photographs courtesy Dr. Rodney
Phoenix.)

As cooling proceeds, the soft resin approaches its glasstransition temperature, Tg, which is the thermal range in which
the polymerized resin passes from a soft, rubbery state to a rigid,
glassy state. Cooling the denture base resin beyond the glasstransition temperature yields a rigid mass. As might be expected,
this rigid mass contracts at a rate different from that of surrounding dental gypsum. The shrinkage occurring below the glass-transition temperature is thermal in nature and varies according to the
composition of the resin.
To illustrate the effect of thermal shrinkage, consider the following example. The glass-transition temperature for PMMA is
approximately 105 °C. Room temperature is 20 °C. The generally
accepted value for the linear coefficient of thermal expansion, α,
for PMMA is 81 ppm/°C. Therefore, as the denture base resin
cools from the glass-transition temperature to room temperature,
the resin undergoes a linear shrinkage, which can be expressed as
follows:
Linear shrinkage  T  (81  106 )(105  20)  0.69%
This value agrees with the linear shrinkages of 0.12% to
0.97% reported for various commercial denture base resins (see
Table 11-1).
Complete dentures constructed using chemical-activated resins generally display better adaptation than those constructed
using heat-activated resins. This phenomenon can be attributed to
the negligible thermal shrinkage displayed by chemical-activated
resins. Processing shrinkage has been measured as 0.26% for a

representative chemical-activated resin, compared with 0.53% for
a representative heat-activated resin.
Given the preceding information regarding polymerization
shrinkage and denture base adaptation, chemical-activated resins
appear to provide significant advantages over heat-activated resins.
However, there are several other factors that affect the dimensional
characteristics of processed denture bases, including the type of
investing medium, method of resin introduction, and temperature used to activate the polymerization process.
On completion of the polymerization process, individual denture bases and master casts are retrieved and returned to their
respective dental articulator(s). Dimensional changes are assessed
with respect to the proposed vertical dimension of occlusion.
Fluid-resin techniques used in conjunction with hydrocolloid investing media generally yield decreases in the vertical
dimension. Conversely, dentures processed using heat-activated
or chemical-activated resins in conjunction with compression
molding techniques usually display increases in the overall
vertical dimension. Minimal increases in the vertical dimension are considered desirable because they permit a return to
the proposed occlusal vertical dimension via occlusal grinding
procedures.
Dimensional changes occurring in denture bases fabricated
from various resins are illustrated in Figure 11-12 as gaps at the
posterior palatal border. Additional dimensional factors include the
setting expansion of the gypsum product used to make the master
cast and investing component and expansion from water sorption
of the cured acrylic resin after polymerization is complete.

A

B

C

CHAPTER 11

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

D

E

245

• Figure 11-13 Heat-activated denture base resin exhibiting different types and degrees of porosity.
A, Properly polymerized; no porosity. B and C, Rapid heating, relatively small subsurface voids. D, Insufficient mixing of monomer and polymer; large voids resulting from localized polymerization shrinkage.
E, Insufficient pressure during polymerization; relatively large, irregular voids. (From Tuckfield WJ, Worner
HK, Guerin BD: Acrylic resins in dentistry. Aust Dent J, 47:119–121, 1943.)

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the causes of porosity when fluid-resin denture fabrication
techniques are used? How can these difficulties be minimized?

Porosity
Porosity is noted to likely develop in thicker portions of a denture base. Such porosity results from the vaporization of unreacted monomers when the temperature of a resin reaches or
exceeds the boiling points of these species. Nonetheless, this type
of porosity may not occur equally throughout the affected resin
segments.
Consider the specimens in Figure 11-13, A (no porosity) and
B and C (localized subsurface porosity). Specimens B and C
were flasked in such a manner that the section displaying porosity was nearer to the center of the investment mass, whereas the
nonporous section was nearer to the surface of the metal flask.
As might be expected, the metal conducted heat away from the
periphery, preventing the low-molecular-weight species from boiling and yielding porosity. In contrast, resin specimens surrounded
by larger amounts of gypsum, a poor thermal conductor, were
subjected to a significant exotherm that led to vaporization of lowmolecular-weight species and noticeable porosity.
Porosity also may result from inadequate mixing of powder and
liquid components. During polymerization, these regions shrink
more than adjacent regions, and the localized shrinkage tends to
produce voids (Figure 11-13, D). The occurrence of such porosity
can be minimized by ensuring the greatest possible homogeneity in the resin. Proper polymer-to-monomer ratios and well-controlled mixing procedures are essential. Because the material is
more homogeneous in the doughlike stage, delay packing is wise
until this consistency has been reached.
A third type of porosity can be caused by inadequate pressure or insufficient material in the mold during polymerization
(Figure 11-13, E). Voids resulting from these inadequacies are not
spherical; they assume irregular shapes. These voids may be so
abundant that the resultant resin appears significantly lighter and
more opaque than the intended color.
A final type of porosity most often associated with fluid resins
is air entrapment during mixing and pouring procedures. Careful
mixing, spruing, and venting are essential in preventing such voids.

Water Sorption
PMMA absorbs small amounts of water when placed in an aqueous environment. As water molecules penetrate the PMMA mass,
they occupy spaces between polymer chains. Consequently, the
affected polymer chains are forced apart. The introduction of
water molecules produces two important effects. First, the water
causes a slight expansion of the polymerized mass. Second, water
molecules interfere with the entanglement of polymer chains
and thereby act as plasticizers. This permits the relaxation of
stresses incurred during polymerization. As stresses are relieved,
polymerized resins may undergo changes in shape. Fortunately,
these changes are relatively minor and do not exert significant
effects on the fit or function of the processed denture bases.
For each 1% increase in weight produced by water sorption,
acrylic resin has been estimated to exhibit a linear expansion of
0.23%. Laboratory tests indicate that the linear expansion caused
by water sorption is approximately equal to the thermal shrinkage encountered as a result of the polymerization process. Hence,
these processes very nearly offset one another.
Because the presence of water adversely affects the physical and dimensional properties of denture base resins, diffusion
coefficients also warrant consideration. The diffusion coefficient
of water in representative heat-activated denture acrylic resin
is 0.011 × 10-6 cm2/s at 37 °C. For a representative chemicalactivated resin, the diffusion coefficient is 0.023 × 10-6 cm2/s.
Because the diffusion coefficients of water in representative denture resins are relatively low, the time required for a denture base
to reach saturation can be considerable. This is dependent on the
thickness of the resin and the storage conditions. A typical heatactivated denture base may require a period of 17 days to become
fully saturated with water.
The results of laboratory investigations indicate that there are
very slight differences in the dimensions of heat-activated and
chemical-activated denture bases following prolonged storage
in water. Compression-molded heat-activated denture bases are
slightly undersized when measured from second molar to second molar. Conversely, compression-molded chemical-activated
denture bases are slightly oversized when measured in the same
regions. The clinical significance of this difference is negligible.
ANSI/ADA Standard No. 139 identifies guidelines regarding
the testing and acceptance of denture base resins. To test water
sorption, a disk of material with specified dimensions is prepared

246

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

and dried to a constant weight. This weight is recorded as a baseline value. The disk is then soaked in 37 °C distilled water for
7 days. Again, the disk is weighed, and this value is compared with
the baseline value. According to the specification, weight gain following immersion must not be greater than 32 µg/mm3.

Solubility
Although denture base resins are soluble in a variety of liquids,
they are virtually insoluble in the fluids commonly encountered in
the oral cavity. ANSI/ADA Standard No. 139 prescribes a testing
regimen for the measurement of resin solubility. This procedure
is a continuation of the water-sorption test described in the preceding section. Following the required water immersion, the test
disk is permitted to dry and is reweighed. This value is compared
with the baseline value to determine weight loss. According to
the standard, weight loss must not be greater than 8.0 µg/mm3
for chemical-cured PMMA and 1.6 µg/mm3 for heat-, light-, and
microwave-activated PMMA.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the causes of processing stresses? What are the clinical
implications of these stresses, if any?

Processing Stresses
Whenever a natural dimensional change is inhibited, the affected
material sustains internal stresses. If stresses are relaxed, distortion
of the material can occur. This principle has important ramifications in the fabrication of denture bases because stresses are commonly induced during processing.
Consider the events that occur during denture base polymerization. A moderate amount of shrinkage occurs as individual
monomers are linked to form polymer chains. During this process, friction between the mold walls and soft resin may inhibit
normal shrinkage of these chains. In such instances, the polymer chains are stretched, and tensile stresses develop within the
material.
Stresses also are produced as a result of thermal shrinkage. As
a polymerized resin is cooled below this material’s glass-transition
temperature, the resin becomes relatively rigid. Further cooling
results in thermal shrinkage. A denture base resin is encased in a
rigid investing medium, such as dental gypsum, during this process. Because denture base resins and gypsum materials contract
at different rates, a contraction differential is established. This disparity in contraction rates yields stresses within the resin. Additional factors that may contribute to processing stresses include
improper mixing and handling of the resin and poorly controlled
heating and cooling of the flask assembly.

Crazing
When dimensional changes alone cannot relieve internal stresses,
hairline microcracks may develop as a means of dissipating energy
and completing relaxation. The production of such flaws, or
microcracks, is termed crazing.
Figure 11-14 shows crazing of denture base resin around
porcelain teeth. Such damage may occur during cooling of
the denture. When this occurs, the resin contracts more than
the adjacent porcelain, and tensile stresses are established in
the areas adjacent to the tooth. When these stresses exceed the

• Figure 11-14 Crazing around porcelain teeth.
tensile strength of the resin, microcracking occurs, and craze
lines result. Crazing in a transparent resin imparts a “hazy” or
“foggy” appearance. In a tinted resin, crazing imparts a whitish
appearance. Each craze line represents physical separation of the
resin caused by tensile stresses. In addition to esthetic effects,
these surface cracks predispose a denture resin to fracture. The
widespread use of acrylic resin teeth of similar thermal contraction of the denture base resins has decreased the incidence of
denture base crazing.
Crazing of denture base materials also may be induced by
organic solvents. When PMMA is immersed in ethanol, the
material swells as the ethanol diffuses into the PMMA mass. During this process, the solvent overcomes relatively weak van der
Waals forces and produces narrow gaps in the denture base resin.
Despite the creation of gaps, strong covalent bonds within the
polymeric chains maintain the overall integrity of the material.
Nevertheless, when the solvent evaporates, the gaps manifest as
craze lines.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What variables reduce the strength of acrylic resin denture bases? What
processing method is most likely to produce denture bases with decreased
fracture resistance?

Strength
The strength of an individual denture base resin is dependent on
many factors, including the composition of the resin, processing
technique, and conditions presented by the oral environment.
To provide acceptable physical properties, denture base resins
must meet or exceed the standards presented in ANSI/ADA Standard No. 139. A transverse test is used to evaluate the relationship
between the applied load and resultant deflection in a resin specimen of prescribed dimensions. Representative deflection–load
results are presented in Figure 11-15.
Inspection of Figure 11-15 reveals a curvature to each component of the deflection–load plot. Because no straight-line portion
is evident, one may assume that plastic deformation occurs during
the loading process. Some elastic deformation also occurs. From
a clinical standpoint, this means that load application produces
stresses within a resin and a change in the overall shape of the
denture base. When the load is released, stresses within the resin
are relaxed and the denture base begins to return to the denture’s

CHAPTER 11

247

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

7

Tested in

10

Air 32% R.H.
Air 32% R.H.
Water
Water

Water
Air
Water
Air

9
8
7
Deflection (mm)

Deflection (mm)

6

Condition in

2.5 h
– 5.7
kg
5.5
h–
6
.
3k
1
g
24 8 h
–6 9h
h
–
.
5 k 6.5
–
kg
6.
g
5
kg

8

5

4

3

kg
8
6. g
– k
h .9
48 – 6
h
72

6
5
4
3
2

2
1
0

1

0

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Load (kg)

• Figure 11-15 Transverse deflection–load curve for a typical denture
base resin, showing the influences of different conditioning procedures
and testing environments. Before testing, all specimens were conditioned
for 3 days as indicated. R.H., Relative humidity. (Data from Swaney AC,
Paffenbarger GC, Caul HJ, et al.: American Dental Association Specification No. 12 (replaced by No. 139 in 2012) for denture base resin, second
revision. J Am Dent Assoc, 46:54–66, 1953. Reprinted by permission of
ADA Publishing, a Division of ADA Business Enterprises, Inc.)

original shape. Nevertheless, plastic deformation prevents complete recovery.
Perhaps the most important determinant of resin strength is
the degree of polymerization exhibited by the material. As the
degree of polymerization increases, the strength of the resin also
increases. Hence, the polymerization cycle employed with a heatactivated resin is important. Figure 11-16 reveals the effects that
processing cycles exert on deflection–load properties. Note that
a longer polymerization cycle appears to yield improved physical
properties.
In comparison with heat-activated resins, the chemical-activated resins generally display lower degrees of polymerization. As
a result, chemical-activated resins exhibit increased levels of residual monomer and decreased strength and stiffness. Despite these
characteristics, heat- and chemical-activated resins display similar
elastic moduli.

2

3

4
Load (kg)

5

6

7

• Figure 11-16 Deflection–load curves for samples of poly(methyl methacrylate) polymerized for different periods at 71 °C (160 °F). Processing times
and fracture loads are noted on individual curves. (Data from Harman IM:
Effects of time and temperature on polymerization of a methacrylate resin
denture base. J Am Dent Assoc, 38:188–203, 1949. Reprinted by permission of ADA Publishing, a Division of ADA Business Enterprises, Inc.)

is dependent on specimen size and geometry, the distance between
specimen supports, and the presence or absence of notching.
Knoop hardness values for heat-activated resins may be as high
as 20 KHN, whereas the associated values for chemically activated
resins generally range from 16 to 18 KHN.

Creep
Acrylic denture resins display viscoelastic behavior. When a denture base resin is subjected to a sustained load, the material may
exhibit deformation with both elastic (recoverable) and plastic
(irrecoverable) components. If this load is not removed, additional
plastic deformation can occur over time. This additional deformation is termed creep.
The rate at which this progressive deformation occurs is termed
the creep rate. This rate can be elevated by increases in temperature,
applied load, residual monomer, and/or the presence of plasticizers. Although creep rates for heat-activated and chemical-activated
resins are very similar at low stresses, creep rates for chemical-activated resins increase more rapidly as stresses are raised.

Impact Strength and Hardness

Biological Properties of Denture Base Resins

Charpy impact strengths for heat-activated denture resins commonly range from 0.98 to 1.27 joules, whereas those for chemical-activated resins are somewhat lower (0.78 joules). Impact
strengths for high-impact resins such as Lucitone 199 may be
twice those reported for conventional PMMA resins. Increased
impact resistance is commonly imparted via the incorporation
of rubbery hydrocarbon components such as butyl acrylate and
polystyrene within the associated polymers. Clinicians should recognize that the preceding values are useful only for comparison of
products because the energy absorbed by an individual specimen

Infection-Control Procedures
Care should be taken to prevent microbial and viral crosscontamination between patients and dental personnel, including
personnel in the dental laboratory. New appliances should be disinfected before leaving the dental laboratory. Existing prostheses
should be disinfected before entering the laboratory and following
completion of laboratory procedures. All materials used for finishing and polishing should be handled according to established
infection-control guidelines. Items such as rag wheels should be

248

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

autoclaved, and materials such as pumice should be used according to unit-dose recommendations.

Critical Question
What is the optimal technique for repairing a fractured acrylic denture base?

Critical Question
Which components of denture resins are most likely to cause an allergic
reaction?

Additional Procedures Associated With
Dentures

Allergic Reactions

Denture Repair

Possible toxic or allergic reactions to PMMA have long been postulated. Reactions can occur following contact with the polymers,
residual monomers, benzoyl peroxide, hydroquinone inhibitor,
pigments, or a reaction product between some component of the
denture base and its environment. Despite the foregoing concerns,
adverse reactions are more commonly related to uninterrupted
denture wear.
Clinical experience indicates that true allergic reactions to
acrylic resins seldom occur in the oral cavity. Irritation is slightly
more common and is related to residual monomer. Irritation reactions are relatively rare because the residual monomer content of a
properly processed denture is less than 1%. Furthermore, surface
monomer is completely eliminated following storage in water for
at least 17 hours.
Reactions to residual monomer should occur shortly after
prosthesis delivery. However, the majority of patients reporting
sore mouth resulting from denture wear have worn the offending prostheses for months or even years. Clinical evaluation of
these cases indicates that tissue irritation is commonly related to
continuous intraoral wear, fungal colonization, poor oral hygiene,
trauma secondary to ill-fitting denture bases, and/or suboptimal
denture occlusion.
Repeated or prolonged contact with monomer can also result
in contact dermatitis. Personnel involved in the manipulation of
denture resins most commonly experience this condition. Hence
dental laboratory personnel should refrain from handling such
materials with bare hands. The high concentration of monomer
in freshly mixed resins may produce local irritation and serious
sensitization of the fingers.
Finally, it should be noted that inhalation of monomer vapor
may be detrimental. Therefore the use of monomer should be
restricted to well-ventilated areas.

Despite the favorable physical characteristics of denture base resins, denture bases sometimes fracture. In most instances, these
fractures can be repaired using compatible resins. Repair resins
may be light-, heat-, or chemical-activated.
To accurately accomplish the repair of a fractured prosthesis,
the clinician must realign the denture components and stabilize
them using an adherent wax or modeling plastic. When this has
been accomplished, a repair cast is generated using dental gypsum. The denture is then removed from the cast, and the luting
medium is eliminated. In turn, the fracture surfaces are trimmed
to provide sufficient room for repair material and produce a survivable repair joint. The gypsum cast is coated with separating
medium to prevent adherence of repair resin, and the denture base
sections are repositioned and affixed to the cast.
At this point, a repair material is chosen. Chemical-activated
resins are generally preferred over heat- and light-activated resins despite the fact that chemical-activated resins display lower
transverse strength and color change. The principal advantage
of chemical-activated resins is that they may be polymerized at
room temperature. Heat- and light-activated repair materials
must be placed in water baths and light chambers, respectively.
Heat generated by water baths and light chambers often causes
stress release and distortion of previously polymerized denture
base segments.
The following sequence is employed to accomplish denture
base repair using a chemical-activated resin. A small amount of
monomer is painted onto the prepared surfaces of the denture
base to promote bonding of the repair material. Increments of
monomer and polymer are added to the repair area using a small
sable-hair brush or suitable substitute. An excess of material is
placed at the repair site to account for polymerization shrinkage.
The assembly is placed in a pressure chamber under hot water and
allowed to polymerize. The repair site is then shaped, finished, and
polished using conventional techniques.

Toxicology
There is no evidence that commonly used dental resins produce
systemic toxic effects in humans. As previously noted, the amount
of residual monomer in processed PMMA is extremely low. To
enter the circulatory system, residual monomer must pass through
the oral mucosa and underlying tissues. These structures function
as barriers that significantly diminish the volume of monomer
reaching the bloodstream.
Residual monomer that does reach the bloodstream is rapidly
hydrolyzed to methacrylic acid and excreted. It is estimated that
the half-life of methyl methacrylate in circulating blood is 20 to
40 minutes.
Metal oxide (cadmium/selenium) red pigments were used for
many years to color denture base resins. Although toxic in all concentrations, the pigments are locked within the denture base polymer network and used in very small concentrations. Nevertheless,
most manufacturers have switched to organic pigment systems
(e.g., Cromophtal Red BRN) to avoid such toxic effects.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Under what conditions might resilient (soft) denture liners be used rather than
rebasing an acrylic denture base?

Short-Term and Long-Term Resilient Soft
Denture Liners
The purpose of a resilient soft denture liner is to absorb some of
the energy produced by masticatory impact. Hence, a soft liner
serves as a “shock absorber” between the occlusal surfaces of a denture and the underlying oral tissues. Liners also may provide added
retention by entering anatomical undercuts if present. The most
commonly used liners are plasticized acrylic resins. These resins
may be heat-activated or chemical-activated resins and are based
on familiar chemistries. Additional materials include silicone rubber, plasticized vinyl polymers and copolymers, polyphosphazene

CHAPTER 11

fluoropolymers, and fluoroethylene and polyvinyl siloxane addition-cured silicones.

Compositions
All soft denture liners exhibit glass-transition temperatures that
are lower than body temperature to allow sustained resilience.
Most common materials used gain that property by incorporating
plasticizer. Chairside resilient liners generally employ PMMA or
poly(ethyl methacrylate) powder as principal structural components mixed with liquids containing 60% to 80% plasticizer. The
plasticizer commonly is a large molecular species such as dibutyl phthalate or an alcohol. The distribution of large plasticizer
molecules reduces the entanglement of polymer chains, thereby
permitting individual chains to “slip” past one another, permitting
changes in the shape of the soft liner and providing a cushioning
effect for the underlying tissues. It is important to note that the
liquids used in such applications do not contain acrylic monomers. Consequently, the resultant liners are considered shortterm soft liners, or tissue conditioners.
Although plasticizers impart flexibility, they also present certain difficulties. Plasticizers are not bound within the resin mass.
Therefore they may be “leached out.” As this occurs, resilient liners
may become progressively more rigid. Hence, the use of liners that
are less prone to leaching is advantageous.
In recent years, the phthalate esters have attracted attention
because they mimic estrogenic hormones in the body after they
migrate from the liner. Alternatives are now in use, including trimellitates, aliphatic dibasic esters, phosphates, benzoates, citrate
esters, polymeric plasticizers, sulfonic acid, chloroparaffins, and
sorbitol.
As PMMA is replaced by higher-molecular-weight methacrylates (e.g., ethyl, n-propyl, and n-butyl), the Tg becomes progressively lower (Chapter 2, Thermal Properties). As a result, less
plasticizer is required, and the effects of leaching can be minimized.
Perhaps the most successful materials for soft liner applications
have been the silicone rubbers. These materials are not dependent
on leachable plasticizers, and they retain their elastic properties for
prolonged periods. Unfortunately, silicone rubbers do not absorb
shock and may lose adhesion to underlying denture bases over
time. They are prone to colonization by fungi, which grow in the
pores in the material and are difficult to remove.
Silicone rubbers may be chemical-activated or heat-activated
silicones. Chemical-activated silicones are supplied as two-component systems that polymerize via condensation reactions.
Processing Resilient Soft Denture Liners
To reline a denture, the denture base is relieved to permit an
acceptable thickness of the chosen material. A special adhesive is
applied to the surface of the denture base to facilitate bonding.
The resilient material is mixed, applied to the denture base via
compression molding, and permitted to polymerize. In turn, the
denture is recovered, finished, and polished. As with all resilient
liners, the use of rotary instruments that rotate from the liner
toward the denture base to prevent the initiation of peeling is
important.
Heat-activated silicones are one-component systems supplied
as pastes or gels. These materials are applied and contoured using
compression molding techniques. Heat-activated silicones may be
applied to polymerized resin bases, or they may be polymerized in
conjunction with freshly mixed resins.
To promote adhesion between silicone resilient liners and rigid
denture base materials, rubber-PMMA cements often are used.

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

249

These cements serve as chemical intermediates that bond to both
soft liners and denture resins. The strongest bonds occur against
fresh acrylic.
At least one silicone liner does not require an adhesive when
it is cured together with an acrylic denture base material. This
material actually is a silicone copolymer that contains components
capable of bonding with acrylic resins.

Care of Denture Resilient Soft Liners
All soft liners display certain shortcomings. For instance, silicone
liners are poorly adherent to denture base resins. Many resilient
soft liners bond well to denture bases but become progressively
more rigid as plasticizers are lost to the oral environment. Hardening rates for these liners are associated with the initial plasticizer
content. As the plasticizer content is increased, the probability of
plasticizer loss is increased. Hence, materials with a high initial
plasticizer content tend to harden rather rapidly.
Resilient liners also exert significant effects on associated denture bases. As the thickness of a soft liner is increased, the thickness of the accompanying denture base must be decreased, and
this results in decreased denture base strength. This may result in
fracture of the denture base during clinical service.
Perhaps the greatest difficulty associated with silicone longand short-term resilient liners is that these materials cannot be
cleaned effectively. As a result, patients often report disagreeable
tastes and odors related to these materials. The liners themselves
do not support mycotic growth, but such growth is supported by
debris that accumulates in the pores of these materials. The most
common fungal growth associated with soft liners is C. albicans.
Several cleaning regimens have been used in conjunction with
resilient liners. These regimens have met with limited success.
Both oxygenating and hypochlorite-type denture cleansers have
been employed. Unfortunately, these agents can cause significant
damage to resilient soft liners, particularly the silicone materials.
Mechanical cleaning of resilient liners also may lead to damage,
but such debridement often is necessary. If mechanical cleaning
is undertaken, a soft brush should be used in conjunction with a
mild detergent solution or nonabrasive dentifrice.
In attempts to address potential problems, antimycotic agents
have been incorporated into soft liners. Although this approach is
promising, the limited duration of antimycotic activity is far from
ideal. Therefore additional research is warranted.
In 1989, a long-term soft resilent liner was introduced that
uses a polyphosphazene fluoroelastomer with a –[P = N]– backbone and interpenetrating di- and tri-functional crosslinking
acrylics, pigment, and BaSO4 filler. The liner is compressionmolded against fresh acrylic and heat-cured conventionally. The
material has no plasticizers, absorbs chewing forces because of its
high energy damping, resists fungal overgrowth, is radiopaque,
and is machinable.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are denture reline materials considered temporary-use products?

Relining Resin Denture Bases
Because alveolar ridge contours change with time, it is sometimes
necessary to alter the tissue surfaces of prostheses to ensure proper
fit. In some instances, this can be achieved by selective grinding
procedures. In other instances, tissue surfaces must be replaced by
relining or rebasing existing dentures.

250

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

Relining involves replacement of the tissue surface of an existing denture, whereas rebasing involves replacement of the entire
denture base except for the denture teeth. In both instances, an
impression of the soft tissues is made using the existing denture
as an impression tray. A gypsum cast is generated in the impression, and the resultant assembly is invested in a denture flask.
Subsequently, the flask is opened and prepared for the introduction of resin.
At this stage, the impression material is removed from the denture. The tissue surface is cleaned to enhance bonding between the
existing denture base and the reline material. Next, an appropriate resin is introduced and shaped using a compression-molding
technique.
For relining, a low polymerization temperature is desirable
to minimize distortion of the remaining denture base. Hence, a
chemical-activated resin is usually chosen. The selected material is
mixed according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, placed
into the mold, compressed, and permitted to polymerize. Finally,
the denture is recovered, finished, and polished.
If a chemical-activated resin is selected for relining the existing denture, a specialized mounting assembly may be used in
lieu of flasking. This assembly maintains the correct vertical and
horizontal relationships between the cast and the denture, while
eliminating the need to encase the remaining denture base in dental gypsum. This facilitates recovery of the denture at the end of
the relining process.
Relining can also be accomplished using resins that are activated by heat, light, or microwave energy. In all of these instances,
significant heat can be generated, and distortion of the existing
denture base will be more likely.
Similar materials are marketed for home use. Unfortunately, the
majority of patients do not possess adequate knowledge to manipulate these materials correctly; therefore the use of such products
can result in damage to the oral tissues and should be discouraged.

Rebasing Resin Dentures
The steps required in denture rebasing are similar to those
described for relining. An accurate impression of the soft tissues
is made using the existing denture as a custom tray. Subsequently,
a gypsum cast is fabricated in the impression. The cast and denture are mounted in a device designed to maintain the correct
vertical and horizontal relationships between the gypsum cast and
surfaces of the prosthetic teeth. The resultant assembly provides
indices for the occlusal surfaces of the prosthetic teeth. After these
indices have been established, the denture is removed, and the
teeth are separated from the existing denture base. The teeth are
repositioned in their respective indices and held in their original
relationships to the cast while they are waxed to a new baseplate.
At this point, the denture base is waxed to the desired form.
The completed tooth arrangement is sealed to the cast, and the
assembly is invested as previously described. Following elimination of the wax and removal of the baseplate, freshly mixed denture base resin is introduced into the mold cavity. Subsequently,
the denture base is processed, recovered, finished, and polished.
The completed prosthesis consists of a new denture base in conjunction with teeth from the patient’s previous denture.

Resin Impression Trays and Tray Materials
Resin trays are commonly used in dental impression procedures.
Unlike stock trays, resin impression trays are fabricated to fit the

arches of individual patients. Therefore resin impression trays are
commonly called “custom trays.”
The majority of custom trays are fabricated using light-activated and chemical-activated resin systems. Each system has
advantages and disadvantages. Light-activated materials eliminate
methyl methacrylate exposure but are more expensive and require
high-intensity light units for polymerization. Chemical-activated
resins are less expensive but have been associated with contact dermatitis, particularly in laboratory personnel.
The steps in custom tray fabrication may be described as follows: A preliminary impression is made using a stock tray and an
appropriate impression material. In turn, a gypsum cast is generated. A suitable spacer (e.g., putty silicone [avoid wax]) is placed
on the gypsum cast to provide the desired relief. Subsequently, a
separating medium is applied to the surface of the cast. At this
stage, fabrication techniques for light-activated materials and
chemical-activated materials become divergent.
Light-activated resins are supplied in rope, sheet, and gel forms.
Sheet forms are preferred for custom tray fabrication because of
their favorable handling characteristics. Individual sheets are pliable and can be adapted to the associated casts and spacers with
relative ease. A handle is added to facilitate removal of the tray
from the mouth, the entire assembly is placed in a light chamber,
and the resin is polymerized.
Chemical-activated resins typically are PMMA and are supplied as powder–liquid systems. The components are mixed to
form a doughlike mass. The dough is then rolled into a sheet
approximately 2 mm thick, adapted to the diagnostic cast with a
handle as described previously, and allowed to polymerize.
Upon completion of the fabrication process, both light-activated and chemical-activated custom trays are removed from the
associated casts and mechanically trimmed. The peripheries are
rounded to make sure that patients will not be harmed by sharp
or irregular edges. At this point, trays are evaluated intraorally and
refined as necessary.

Denture Cleansers
Patients use a wide variety of agents for cleaning artificial dentures. These include dentifrices, proprietary denture cleansers,
mild detergents, household cleansers, bleaches, and vinegar.
The most common commercial products are based on immersion techniques. These cleansers are marketed in powder and
tablet forms containing alkaline compounds, detergents, sodium
perborate, and flavoring agents. When dissolved in water, sodium
perborate decomposes to form an alkaline peroxide solution. This
solution subsequently releases oxygen, which loosens debris via
mechanical means.
Household bleaches (hypochlorites) are also used in denture
cleaning applications. Dilute bleach solutions can be used to
remove certain types of stains. Unfortunately, prolonged use of
bleach-containing solutions can remove color from denture bases,
denture liners, and prosthetic teeth.
Bleaches and bleach solutions should not be used for cleaning
metal prostheses such as removable partial denture frameworks.
These solutions produce significant darkening of base metals and
may irreparably damage the affected prostheses.
The use of brushes and abrasive cleansers can produce a range
of effects on resin surfaces. Toothbrushes alone produce minimal
wear of resin surfaces. Toothbrushes in conjunction with most
commercial dentifrices, mild detergents, and soaps also appear
to be relatively nondestructive. Conversely, household cleansers,

CHAPTER 11

such as kitchen and bathroom abrasives, are contraindicated. Prolonged use of such cleansers may cause noticeable wear of resin
surfaces and adversely affect the function and esthetics of these
prostheses. Therefore patients should be educated regarding the
care and cleaning of dental prostheses.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What precautions should be taken when using porcelain teeth in a denture?
What are the clinically relevant differences between porcelain teeth and
acrylic resin teeth?

Prosthetic Polymers and Resins

251

Unfortunately, porcelain teeth often cause significant wear of
opposing enamel, metal, and resin tooth surfaces, especially when
contacting surfaces have been roughened. As a result, porcelain
teeth should not oppose such surfaces, and if they are used, they
should be polished periodically to reduce abrasive damage.
It should be noted that resin teeth are capable of chemical
bonding with commonly used denture base resins. Porcelain teeth
do not form chemical bonds with denture base resins and must be
retained by bonded pins, mechanical undercuts, and/or silanization. As an additional consideration, leakage at the tooth–denture
base junction can be seen as a dark line when food and microbes
penetrate the interface.

Resin Teeth for Prosthetic Applications
The majority of preformed artificial teeth sold in the United States
are made of acrylic or vinyl-acrylic resins. As might be expected,
the methacrylate chemistries used in the fabrication of prosthetic
teeth are similar to those used in denture base construction. The
degree of crosslinking at the occlusal and incisal surfaces of prosthetic teeth is much greater than that exhibited by polymerized
denture base materials. The increased crosslinking of prosthetic
teeth in conjunction with the addition of inorganic filler increases
wear resistance and improves clinical properties.
Cervical portions of prosthetic teeth often exhibit reduced
crosslinking to facilitate chemical bonding with denture base
resins. Additional retention may be achieved by removing the
glossy “ridge-lap” surfaces of resin teeth and preparing mechanical
undercuts.
Chemical bonding between resin teeth and heat-activated denture base materials has proven extremely effective. Nevertheless,
bond failures can occur if ridge-lap surfaces are contaminated by
residual wax or misplaced separating media. To optimize bonding,
gypsum molds must be flushed with hot water, and the exposed cervical portions of prosthetic teeth must be thoroughly cleaned with
mild detergent solutions. Separating media must be applied to gypsum mold surfaces but must not extend onto the exposed surfaces of
resin teeth. As a final measure, ridge-lap surfaces should be wetted
with monomer immediately before resin introduction.
To enhance the wear resistance of prosthetic dentitions, manufacturers have introduced “hybrid” teeth exhibiting multilayer construction. These teeth include both resin composites and PMMA
components. Resin composites are found primarily on occlusal
and incisal surfaces of the prosthetic teeth and are intended to provide improved wear resistance. Unfortunately, chemical bonding
between resin composites and heat-activated denture base materials is inferior to that which occurs between resin teeth and such
denture base materials. To address this shortcoming, manufacturers have incorporated PMMA at the ridge-lap and lingual surfaces
of hybrid teeth. The presence of PMMA on these surfaces facilitates predictable bonding with heat-activated PMMA resins. Nevertheless, operators must be certain not to eliminate the PMMA
surfaces during the tooth-arrangement process.
Despite the current emphasis on resin teeth, prosthetic teeth
also may be fabricated using vacuum- or pressure-fired feldspathic
porcelains. Hence a comparison of resin and porcelain teeth is
warranted.
Resin teeth display greater impact resistance and ductility than
porcelain teeth. As a result, resin teeth are less likely to chip or
fracture on impact, such as when a denture is dropped. Furthermore, resin teeth are easier to adjust, and they display greater
resistance to thermal shock. In contrast, porcelain teeth display
improved dimensional stability and increased wear resistance.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the benefits and drawbacks of the materials used in the
construction of maxillofacial prostheses?

Materials for Maxillofacial Prosthetics
For centuries, prostheses have been used to mask maxillofacial
defects. The ancient Egyptians and Chinese used waxes and resins to reconstruct missing portions of the craniofacial complex. In
the 16th century, the French surgeon Ambroise Paré described a
variety of simple prostheses used for the cosmetic and functional
replacement of maxillofacial structures. During the ensuing years,
restorative techniques and materials were improved and refined.
Casualties in World Wars I and II established an increased need for
maxillofacial prosthetics, and the dental profession assumed a major
role in maxillofacial reconstruction and rehabilitation processes.
Despite improvements in surgical and restorative techniques,
the materials used in maxillofacial prosthetics are far from ideal.
An ideal material should be inexpensive, biocompatible, strong,
and stable. In addition, the material should be skinlike in color
and texture. Maxillofacial materials should exhibit tear resistance when used in thin films, should exhibit compatibility with
skin adhesives, and should be able to withstand moderate thermal and chemical challenges. Currently, no material fulfills all of
these requirements. A brief summary of maxillofacial materials is
included in the following paragraphs.

Latexes
Latexes are soft, inexpensive materials that can be used to create
lifelike prostheses. Unfortunately, these materials are weak, degenerate rapidly, and exhibit color instability. Therefore latexes are
rarely used in the fabrication of long-term maxillofacial prostheses.
One synthetic latex is a terpolymer of butyl acrylate, methyl
methacrylate, and methyl methacrylamide. Superior to natural
latex, this material is nearly transparent. Colorants are sprayed
onto the reverse or tissue side of the prosthesis, thereby providing enhanced translucency and improved blending. Despite these
advantages, the associated technical processes are lengthy, and the
resultant prostheses last only a few months. Therefore synthetic
latexes have limited applications.

Vinyl Plastisols
Plasticized vinyl resins are sometimes used in maxillofacial applications. Plastisols are thick liquids composed of small vinyl particles
dispersed in a plasticizer. Colorants are added to these materials

252

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

to match individual skin tones. Subsequently, vinyl plastisols are
heated to impart desired physical characteristics. Unfortunately,
vinyl plastisols harden with age as a result of plasticizer migration.
Ultraviolet light also has an adverse effect on these materials. For
these reasons, the usefulness of vinyl plastisols is limited.

procedure. A gypsum mold may be housed within a brass denture
flask, but this increases the risk of damage to the silicone material
during deflasking.

Silicone Rubbers

Polyurethane also can be used in maxillofacial prosthetics. Fabrication of a polyurethane prosthesis requires accurate proportioning
of three components. The material is placed in a gypsum or metal
mold and allowed to polymerize at room temperature. Although
a polyurethane prosthesis has a natural feel and appearance, it is
susceptible to rapid deterioration, color change from the diet, and
fungal growth.

Silicones were introduced in the mid-1940s and have been used
in maxillofacial applications since the 1950s. Both heat-curing
and room-temperature–curing silicones are in use today, and both
exhibit advantages and disadvantages.
Room-temperature–curing silicones are supplied as singlecomponent materials that cure by the evaporation of acetic acid.
They are intrinsically colored by the addition of dyed rayon fibers,
dry earth pigments, and/or oil-based pigments. Prostheses are
polymerized by bulk packing in two- or three-part gypsum molds,
although more durable molds have been made from epoxy resins
or metals.
Heat-curing silicones are supplied as semisolid or puttylike
materials and are intrinsically colored via the addition of suitable pigments. Following introduction into an appropriately constructed mold, the resultant assembly is exposed to a 30-minute
heat application cycle at 180 °C. Heat-curing silicones display better strength and color stability than room-temperature–curing silicones. Nevertheless, all silicones are susceptible to fungal growth
and fraying at fine margins, so a process of bonding to a sheet of
polyurethane on the tissue surface has been developed. This process not only enhances prosthesis longevity but also improves the
effectiveness of skin adhesives.
The major disadvantage of heat-curing silicones is the requirement for a milling machine and a press. Furthermore, a metal
mold normally is used, and fabrication of the mold is a lengthy

Selected Readings
Arima T, Murata H, Hamad T: The effects of cross-linking agents on
the water sorption and solubility characteristics of denture base
resins, J Oral Rehabil, 23:476–480, 1996.
Bartoloni JA, Murchison DF, Wofford DT, et al: Degree of conversion
in denture base materials for varied polymerization techniques, J Oral
Rehabil, 27:488–493, 2000.
Jagger DC, Jagger RG, Allen SM, et al: An investigation into the transverse and impact strength of “high strength” denture base acrylic resins, J Oral Rehabil, 29:263–267, 2002.
Machado C, Sanchez E, Azer SS, et al: Comparative study of the transverse
strength of three denture base materials, J Dent, 35:930–933, 2007.
Rached RN, Powers JM, Del Bel Cury AA: Repair strength of autopolymerizing, microwave, and conventional heat-polymerized acrylic
resins, J Prosthet Dent, 92:79–82, 2004.

Polyurethane Polymers

Chlorinated Polyethylene
In an effort to overcome the deficiencies of the latex, vinyl plastisol, silicone, and polyurethane materials, a thermoplastic elastomer based on chlorinated polyethylene (CPE) was investigated
in the 1970s and 1980s. With further development, CPE was
shown to provide higher edge strength, permanent elasticity, and
minimal fungal growth. In a recent randomized, controlled clinical trial, it was found that the material was equally preferred by
patients who had never worn facial prostheses before, but patients
who had worn silicone rubber prostheses in the past favored that
material in the trial. Methods of layering the prosthetic material
in the molds to develop color at depth and laminating surface
coloration were also reported, which may be useful in future maxillofacial prosthetics applications.
Additional information may be found in a review by Lemon
et al. (2005), which presents current concepts regarding facial
prosthetic rehabilitation of patients with head and neck cancer
and facial prosthetic biomaterials.

Stafford GD, Bates JF, Huggett R, et al: A review of the properties of
some denture base polymers, J Dent, 8:292–306, 1960.
Swaney AC, Paffenbarger GC, Caul HJ, et al: American Dental Association Specification No. 12 for denture base resin, ed. 2, J Am Dent
Assoc, 46:54–66, 1953.
Takahashi Y, Chai J, Takahashi T, et al: Bond strength of denture teeth to
denture base resins, Int J Prosthodont, 13:59–65, 2000.
Takamata T, Setcos JC: Resin denture bases: Review of accuracy and
methods of polymerization, Int J Prosthodont, 2:555–562, 1989.
Wong D, Cheng LYY, Chow TW, et al: Effect of processing method on
the dimensional accuracy and water sorption of acrylic resin dentures,
J Prosthet Dent, 81:300–304, 1999.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Arima T, Murata H, Hamad T: The effects of cross-linking agents on
the water sorption and solubility characteristics of denture base resins, J Oral Rehabil, 23:476–480, 1996.
Bartoloni JA, Murchison DF, Wofford DT, et al: Degree of conversion
in denture base materials for varied polymerization techniques, J Oral
Rehabil, 27:488–493, 2000.
Blagojevic V, Murphy VM: Microwave polymerization of denture base
materials: a comparative study, J Oral Rehabil, 26:804–808, 1999.
Caswell CW, Norling BK: Comparative study of the bond strengths of
three abrasion-resistant plastic denture teeth bonded to a cross-linked
and a grafted, cross-linked denture base material, J Prosthet Dent,
55:701–708, 1986.
Chai J, Takahashi Y, Takahashi T, et al: Bonding durability of conventional resinous denture teeth and highly crosslinked denture teeth to a
pour-type denture resin, Int J Prosthodont, 13:112–116, 2000.
Clancy JMS, Boyer DB: Comparative bond strengths of light-cured,
heat-cured, and autopolymerizing denture resins to denture teeth,
J Prosthet Dent, 61:457–462, 1989.
Compagnoni MA, Barros Barbosa D, de Souza RF, et al: The effect of
polymerization cycles on porosity of microwave-processed denture
base resin, J Prosthet Dent, 91:281–285, 2004.
Cunningham JL, Benington IC: An investigation of the variables which
may affect the bond between plastic teeth and denture base resin,
J Dent, 27:129–135, 1999.
Dhir G, Berzins DW, Dhuru VB, et al: Physical properties of denture
base resins potentially resistant to Candida adhesion, J Prosthodont,
16:465–472, 2007.
Gettleman LM: Chlorinated polyethylene and polyphosphazenes. In Setcos JC (editor): Materials research in maxillofacial prosthetics, Trans
Acad Dent Mater, 5:156–172, 1992.
Gettleman LM: Uses of polyphosphazene in dentistry. Chapter 2. In Mario
G, Roger D, editors: Applicative Aspects of Poly(organophosphazenes),
New York, 2004, Nova Science Publishers, pp 33–47.
Gettleman LM, Vargo JM, Goist KC, et al: Laboratory and clinical testing of a polyphosphazene resilient denture liner vs. a silicone rubber
liner editor. In Kawahara H, editor: Oral Implantology and Biomaterials, Amsterdam, 1989, Elsevier. Progress in Biomedical Engineering
Series, pp 15–20.
Goodacre CJ, Garbacea A, Naylor P, et al: CAD/CAM fabricated complete dentures: Concepts and clinical methods of obtaining required
morphological data, J Prosthet Dent, 107:34–46, 2012.
Jagger DC, Jagger RG, Allen SM, et al: An investigation into the transverse and impact strength of “high strength” denture base acrylic resins, J Oral Rehabil, 29:263–267, 2002.
Jorge JH, Giampaolo ET, Machado AL, et al: Cytotoxicity of denture
base acrylic resins: A literature review, J Prosthet Dent, 90:190–193,
2003.
Jorge JH, Giampaolo ET, Vergani CE, et al. Cytotoxicity of denture base
resins: Effect of water bath and microwave postpolymerization heat
treatments, Int J Prosthodont, 7:340–344, 2004.
Kanazawa M, Inokoshi M, Minakuchi S, et al: Trial of a CAD/CAM system for fabricating complete dentures, Dent Mater J, 30:93–96, 2011.

Kawahata N, Ono H, Nishi Y, et al: Trial duplication procedure for complete dentures by CAD/CAM, J Oral Rehabil, 24:540–548, 1997.
Kiat-amnuay S, Jacob RF, Chambers MS, et al: Clinical trial of chlorinated polyethylene for facial prosthetics, Int J Prosthodont, 23:263–
270, 2010.
Lemon JC, Kiat-amnuay S, Gettleman LM, et al: Facial prosthetic rehabilitation: preprosthetic surgical techniques and biomaterials, Curr
Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg, 13:255–262, 2005.
Levin B, Sanders JL, Reitz PV: The use of microwave energy for processing acrylic resins, J Prosthet Dent, 61:381–383, 1989.
Machado C, Sanchez E, Azer SS, et al: Comparative study of the transverse strength of three denture base materials, J Dent, 35:930–933,
2007.
Maeda Y, Minoura M, Tsutsumi S, et al: A CAD/CAM system for removable denture. Part 1: Fabrication of complete dentures, Int J Prosthodont, 7:17–21, 1994.
Monsenego P, Baszkin A, de Lourdes Costa J, et al: Complete denture
retention. Part II Wettability studies on various acrylic resin denture
base materials, J Prosthet Dent, 62:308–312, 1989.
Phoenix RD, Mansueto MA, Ackerman NA, et al: Evaluation of mechanical and thermal properties of commonly used denture base resins,
J Prosthodont, 13:17–27, 2003.
Rached RN, Powers JM, Del Bel Cury AA: Repair strength of autopolymerizing, microwave, and conventional heat-polymerized acrylic
resins, J Prosthet Dent, 92:79–82, 2004.
Sanders JL, Levin B, Reitz PV: Porosity in denture acrylic resins cured by
microwave energy, Quintessence Int, 18:453–456, 1987.
Sarac YS, Sarac D, Kulunk T, et al: The effect of chemical surface treatments of different denture base resins on the shear bond strength of
denture repair, J Prosthet Dent, 94:259–266, 2005.
Shlosberg SR, Goodacre CJ, Munoz CA, et al: Microwave energy polymerization of poly(methyl methacrylate) denture base resin, Int J Prosthodont, 2:453–458, 1989.
Stafford GD, Bates JF, Huggett R, et al: A review of the properties of
some denture base polymers, J Dent, 8:292–306, 1960.
Swaney AC, Paffenbarger GC, Caul HJ, et al: American Dental Association Specification No. 12 for denture base resin: second revision, J Am
Dent Assoc, 46:54–66, 1953.
Takahashi Y, Chai J, Takahashi T, et al: Bond strength of denture teeth to
denture base resins, Int J Prosthodont, 13:59–65, 2000.
Takamata T, Setcos JC: Resin denture bases: Review of accuracy and
methods of polymerization, Int J Prosthodont, 2:555–562, 1989.
The Academy of Prosthodontics: The Glossary of Prosthodontic Terms,
9th ed, J Prosthet Dent, 117(5S):e1–e105, 2017.
Tsuchiya H, Hoshino Y, Tajima K, et al: Leaching and cytotoxicity of
formaldehyde and methyl methacrylate from acrylic resin denture
base materials, J Prosthet Dent, 71:618–624, 1994.
Tuckfield WJ, Worner HK, Guerin BD: Acrylic resins in dentistry, Aust
Dent J, 47:119–121, 1943.
Wong D, Cheng LYY, Chow TW, et al: Effect of processing method on
the dimensional accuracy and water sorption of acrylic resin dentures,
J Prosthet Dent, 81:300–304, 1999.
Zappini G, Kammann A, Wachter W: Comparison of fracture tests of
denture base materials, J Prosthet Dent, 90:578–585, 2003.

252.e1

12

Dental Implants
OUTLINE
History of Dental Implants

Implant Biomaterials

Classification of Implants

Selecting an Implant System

Implant Components

Biocompatibility of Implants

Implant Surgical Placement

Biomechanics

Evaluation of Clinical Success

Summary

KEY TERMS
Alloplastic Related to implantation of an inert foreign body.
Ankylosis A condition of joint or tooth immobility resulting from
oral pathology, surgery, or direct contact with bone.
Bioacceptance The ability to be tolerated in a biological environment in spite of adverse effects.
Bioactive Capable of promoting the formation of hydroxyapatite
and bonding to bone.
Endosteal implant A device placed into the alveolar and/or basal
bone of the mandible or maxilla that transects only one cortical
plate.
Epithelial implant A device placed within the oral mucosa.
Implantation The process of grafting or inserting a material
such as an inert foreign body (alloplast) or tissue within
the body.

Micromotion The displacement of the implant root relative to the
bone when the implant is loaded as a result of lack of friction or
bone integration.
Osseointegration The process by which living bony tissue forms
to within 100 Å of the implant surface without any intervening
fibrous connective tissue.
Osteoinductive Ability to promote bone formation through a
mechanism that induces the differentiation of osteoblasts.
Replantation Reinsertion of a tooth back into its jaw socket soon
after intentional extraction or accidental removal.
Subperiosteal implant A dental device that is placed beneath the
periosteum and overlies cortical bone.
Transosteal implant A device that penetrates both cortical plates
and the thickness of alveolar bone.

The restoration and replacement of missing teeth are important
aspects of modern dentistry. As teeth are lost to decay, disease,
and trauma, there is a demand for improvement of esthetics and
restoration of function.
Conventional methods of restoration include a removable complete denture, a removable partial denture, a fixed prosthesis, or combinations of these approaches. There are different indications for each
method, with associated advantages and disadvantages. Removable
dentures have long been considered problematic because of their
varying mobility/stability over time and the inconvenience of removing them each day. Also, many removable dentures were bulky, others
complicated chewing, and some were not adequately esthetic. Fixed
prostheses were considered more esthetic and comfortable for the
patient, but they involved the preparation of adjacent teeth and were
associated with problems such as secondary decay or irreversible pulpitis. If the adjacent teeth did not have restorations, the decision to
prepare them for a fixed prosthesis was difficult because two or more
natural teeth would have to be surgically altered to provide retention
for one or more artificial teeth (a bridge).
For centuries people have attempted to replace missing teeth
by implanting synthetic and natural substances. Implantation has

been defined as the insertion of any object or material, such as an
alloplastic substance or other tissue, either partially or completely, into
the body for therapeutic, diagnostic, prosthetic, or experimental purposes. Implantation is usually differentiated from other, similar procedures, such as replantation and transplantation. Replantation refers to
the reinsertion of a tooth back into its jaw socket after its accidental or
intentional removal, whereas transplantation is the transfer of a body
part (homogeneous or heterogeneous) from one host to another.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How did the concept of implantation evolve into a widely used restorative
technique in dentistry?

History of Dental Implants
Dental implants began as far back as the early Greek, Etruscan,
and Egyptian civilizations, employing various designs and materials ranging from jade and other stones and metals to bone and
ivory. Some of the design concepts used then have evolved into
the implants of today.
253

254

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

Seashells were used in place of teeth in 600 CE, evidence of
which was found in Honduras, and tooth restorations made of
jade and turquoise were found in Mayan skulls. Albucasis de Condue (936–1013) of France used ox bone to replace missing teeth;
this was one of the early documented placements of implants.
Through the centuries, various tooth transplants made of either
human or animal teeth were tested. These transplants became status symbols, and they quickly replaced other artificial alternatives
for restoring missing teeth. Toward the 18th century, Pierre Fauchard and John Hunter further documented tooth transplantation
and specified conditions for the success of this procedure. They
claimed that success was greater with anterior teeth, premolar
teeth, and transplants placed in young people with healthy tooth
sockets. Failure was believed to be the result of the incompatibility
of the type of tooth used or the lack of conformity of the tooth
to the socket.
The recognition of failure rates of transplants increased interest in the implantation of artificial tooth roots. In 1809 Maggiolo fabricated gold roots that were fixed to teeth by means of a
spring. These gold implants were placed into fresh extraction sites,
although they were not truly submerged into bone. The crowns
were placed after healing had occurred around the implant. Many
attempts followed. Harris (1887) proposed the use of a platinum
post coated with lead. The post was shaped like a tooth root,
and the lead was roughened for retention in the socket. Bonwell
(1895) implanted gold or iridium tubes to restore a single tooth
or support complete dentures. Payne (1898) implanted a silver
capsule as a foundation for a porcelain crown that was cemented
weeks after. Scholl (1905) demonstrated a porcelain corrugated
root-shaped implant that lasted for 2 years and was anchored to
adjacent teeth by pins. Greenfield (1913) introduced and patented a hollow “basket” implant made of a meshwork of 24-gauge
iridium-platinum wires soldered with 24-karat gold. This device
was used to support single implants and fixed dental prostheses
(FDPs) comprising as many as eight implants.
Consistent problems with these artificial implant designs and
materials supported the need for a scientific approach to implant
selection and placement. Some have proposed that the “modern
era” started in 1925 with the invention of the tubular extension
implant by H. Leger Dorez. This implant allowed for an expansion of the screw in bone, leading to actual bone anchorage and
initial stability. In 1937 Venable et al. investigated the interactions
of cobalt alloy and other available metals and alloys with bone for
use in dentistry. They concluded that certain metals produced a
galvanic reaction, which led to corrosion when these metals contacted tissue fluids. They proposed the use of Vitallium, a cast
alloy, which was composed of cobalt, chromium, and molybdenum. This alloy was considered to be relatively inert, compatible
with living tissue, and resistant to the adverse reactions with body
fluids. Vitallium has also been used in different forms of surgical devices, such as dental subperiosteal implant and orthopedic plates, screws, nails, and joints. Early evaluations documented
Vitallium implants with survival times of 10 or more years.
The background of research, development, and applications
of biomaterials for dental implants began with the application
of available substances, often of metallic origin. Some separate
the period before 1950 as an era of applications driven by need
and availability. Examples include the early use of wires, pins,
and rods fabricated from gold and other noble metals and alloys.
In the 1950s, the cobalt-based alloys were cast and finished for
subperiosteal and some root-form designs. The austenitic ironbased stainless steels constituted from iron-chromium and nickel

(sometimes with molybdenum as well) were also used in wrought
and machined conditions. Within a decade, titanium and other
reactive-group metals—plus carbons, ceramics, and eventually
polymers—were considered.
The more “modern” era of biomaterials arose by the 1970s,
when materials known and tested in many disciplines were constituted, fabricated, and finished as biomaterials. Consensus standards rapidly evolved for these biomaterials, which resulted in more
consistent control of their properties. A very important aspect of
this evolution—which included biomaterials, designs, and clinical
application—was the clinical research led by P. I. Brånemark in
Sweden. His studies used unalloyed titanium, now known as commercially pure titanium (CPTi); a root-form design; and very controlled conditions for surgery, restoration, and maintenance. Data
presented in literature reviews and consensus conferences over the
period 1972 to 2002 have demonstrated significant improvements
in dental implant survival statistics. When outcomes were evaluated by objective criteria, the average survival at 5 years was about
50% in the 1970s. Since the 2000s, average survival at 10 years
has been above 90% for these types of implants.

Classification of Implants
Implants can be classified according to anatomical location and
device design, implant properties, or implant attachment mechanism.

Anatomical Location and Implant Device Design
The first and most commonly used type of design is the endosteal
(also called endosseous) implant, a device placed into an alveolar
and/or basal bone of the mandible or maxilla that usually transects
only one cortical plate. These implants were formed in many different shapes, such as root-form cylindrical cones or screws. They
also came as thin plates called plate or blade forms and were used
in all areas of the mouth. One example of an endosteal implant
was called the blade implant (Figure 12-1), which was developed
independently in 1967 by two groups led initially by Roberts
(1970) and Linkow (1968). Endosteal blade implants consisted of
thin plates placed into bone; they were most commonly used for
narrow anatomical structures, such as posterior edentulous areas,
after significant resorption of bone. Because of various issues with
blade implants, their application in more recent implantology has
decreased. Another example of an endosteal implant was the ramus
frame implant (Figure 12-2), a horseshoe-shaped stainless-steel
device inserted into the ascending rami (bilateral) and the anterior
symphysis area of the mandible. As with the blade implants, the
number of applications was limited. The most popular endosteal
implant has been the root-form (Figure 12-3), which was designed
initially to mimic the shape of tooth roots for directional load
distribution and for positioning in bone. In longitudinal studies,
the root-form implant has the most documentation of the endosteal implants, although several surgical stages may be needed for
completion.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the indications for the use of mini-implants in dental practice?

A mini-implant is a type of endosteal implant with some indications in dentistry. More notably, their use in orthodontics for
appliance anchorage has increased. Other uses include overdenture

CHAPTER 12

A

Dental Implants

255

• Figure 12-2 Ramus frame blade implant that traverses entire mandible
and attaches to ramus.

B
• Figure 12-1 A, Blade implants embedded in bone, with some bone
loss. B, Failed blade implant prosthesis that was also attached to natural
teeth. (Courtesy Dr. Mickey Calverley.)

retention in areas where there is minimal bone available or in areas
that are narrow. They can also be used to anchor temporary prostheses in the case of overdentures on an arch with newly extracted
teeth. These implants were initially used as temporary implants,
which helped anchor the prosthesis while the larger-diameter
implants were left to osseointegrate. They could then be removed
once the final prosthesis was fabricated. Over time, the success
of these mini-implants has led to their evolution as final restorations for compromised cases. The diameter of mini-implants
ranges from 1.8 to 2.9 mm (Figure 12-4). Most mini-implants
can be placed without having to reflect a flap in the gingival tissue
because of their small diameter. Mini-implants are also designed
for immediate loading, offering the convenience of few visits
and allowing the patients to have their prosthesis immediately.
Although these implants are essentially made from the same material as the larger standard implants and are constructed as rootform implants, the main difference lies in their smaller diameter.
This smaller size allows placement of these implants in areas where
standard implants would normally require a bone-grafting procedure, which results in additional trauma and expense to patients.
As the applications of mini-implants continue to grow, they are
slowly being incorporated for use with FDPs, adding additional
support in the pontic areas.
The second implant design is the subperiosteal implant
(Figure 12-5), which employs an implant substructure and

superstructure. The custom-cast frame was placed directly beneath
the periosteum overlying and fitting along the bony cortex. This
implant was first developed by Dahl (1943) and refined by
Berman (1950), who used a direct-bone-impression technique.
These devices were used to restore partially dentate or completely
edentulous jaws when there was inadequate bone for endosseous implants. Use of the subperiosteal implant has been limited
because of numerous considerations, including the difficulty of
retrieval.
The third design is the transosteal implant (Figure 12-6),
which combines subperiosteal and endosteal components. This
type of implant penetrates both cortical plates and passes through
the full thickness of the alveolar bone. Use of the transosteal
implant has been restricted to the anterior area of the mandible
and provides support for tissue-borne overdentures. The concept
of transosseous implants was first conceived in Germany in the
early 1930s; early examples were made of a cobalt alloy. Small
(1968) developed the mandibular staple implant made of a titanium alloy, which was modified by Bosker (1983), who produced
the transmandibular implant (TMI) made of a gold alloy. Other
names for transosteal implants have included staple bone implant,
mandibular staple implant, and transmandibular implant.
The fourth implant design is the epithelial implant, which
is inserted into the oral mucosa. This type was associated with
a simple surgical technique where the mucosa was used as an
attachment site for metal inserts placed into an acrylic denture.
Several disadvantages are associated with the epithelial implant,
most notably a painful healing process and a requirement for continuous wear. The current use of “mucosal inserts” or epithelial
implants is very limited.
Some oral implantologists also include the endodontic stabilizer as an anatomy-specific application system. These smooth
or threaded pins (or screws) were placed through endodontically
treated teeth with the implant extending into the bone. They were
constructed from alloys or ceramics made of alumina or zirconia.
Reported difficulties included sealing the transition zone from
tooth to bone and the limited strength of small-diameter pins or
screws.
From a historical and applications perspective, these systems
were reviewed by Natiella et al. (1972) and subsequently in each
decade by researchers who participated in professional society–
based consensus conferences. To summarize the various biomaterials and designs tested for dental implants, examples of devices

256

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

A

B

C

• Figure 12-3 A, Endosteal implants are placed directly into bone; they mimic root forms for proper placement and location in bone. B and C, Restored anterior implant blending well with adjacent teeth. (B and
C, Courtesy Drs. Will Martin and Luiz Gonzaga.)

• Figure 12-4 Mini-implants used for orthodontic anchorage, showing
2-mm diameter of the mini-implants compared with the 4-mm diameter
of standard implants.

and fabrication of the prosthesis. For example, the elastic modulus of the implant is inversely related to the strain present at the
implant–tissue interface during loading of the implant; that is, the
greater the elastic modulus of an implant, the greater the stress in
the implant and the lower the stress distributed to bone.
An implant material with an elastic modulus comparable to
that of bone should be selected to produce a more uniform stress
distribution across the interface. Ductility is another important
property because this relates to the potential for some plastic deformation of abutments or fixtures without fracture in areas where
there is high tensile stress. Metals possess both high strength and
ductility, whereas the ceramics and carbons are brittle materials.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
received for examination prior to 1990 are shown in Figures 12-7
through 12-9.

What is the preferred implant-to-tissue interaction? How has this influenced
the popularity of implant applications?

Implant Properties

Implant Attachment Mechanism

Implant biomaterials can also be classified according to their composition and their physical, mechanical, chemical, electrical, and
biological properties. These classifications often include ranked
comparisons of properties, such as elastic moduli, tensile strength,
yield strength, and ductility, to determine optimal clinical applications (Table 12-1). These properties are used to aid in the design

Periodontal structures, which attach teeth to bone, consist of
highly differentiated fibrous tissue. These fibers are replete with
numerous cells and nerve endings that allow for functional force
transfer, sensory function, bone formation, and tooth movements.
Although this is the ideal form of integration, there are no known
implant biomaterials or designs at present that can stimulate the

CHAPTER 12

Dental Implants

257

A
A

B
B
• Figure 12-6 A, Panoramic radiograph of a transosteal implant showing perforation of both cortical plates, hence the name staple implant.
B, Transmucosal abutment for transosteal implant allowing for placement of
denture restoration. (Courtesy Dr. Joseph Cain and Dr. Richard Seals.)

C
• Figure 12-5 A, Subperiosteal implant positioned beneath the periosteum. Impression making often requires a difficult surgical technique.
B, Superstructure for subperiosteal implant allowing for attachment of
prosthesis. C, Denture prosthesis for subperiosteal implant. (Courtesy
Dr. Joseph Cain and Dr. Richard Seals.)

growth of these fibers and can fully mimic the function of the
periodontal ligament and a natural tooth.
In the past, implant attachment to fibrous connective tissue was
accepted as a measure of successful implant function (the pseudoligament concept). This type of interaction was reported to be very
susceptible to acute or chronic inflammatory responses, which were
accompanied by pain and eventual loss of the implant. This type
of attachment has also been called a pseudoperiodontium. Despite
numerous reports of implant success, clinical studies indicate that
this type of interaction is susceptible to progressive loosening and
infection, with subsequent loss of the implant construct.
In contrast to the pseudoperiodontium, the implant-to-bone
interaction (called osseointegration) is characterized by direct
contact between bone and the surface of a functional implant
after 1 year. This central theme of the Brånemark group was called

“direct anchorage to bone” and has become a major attribute of
dental implants. This mode is described as the direct adaptation of bone to implants without any other intermediate nonbony tissue and has been described by some as similar to tooth
ankylosis, where no periodontal ligament or fibrous tissue exists.
The strength of this contact has been shown to be stable, which
is advantageous compared with the soft tissue interface described
previously.
This type of osseous interface has been described extensively
and includes a process wherein bone-producing cells migrate along
the implant surface through the connective tissue scaffolding that
forms adjacent to the implant surface. Integration at the implant
interface is highly dependent on the implant surface’s chemistry
and design. Bone apposition has been reported at higher rates
when microscopic surface ridges are present. Osseous integration
has also been achieved through the use of bioactive materials that
stimulate the formation of bone along the surface of the implant.
Another way of achieving osseous integration involves de novo
bone formation, wherein a mineralized interfacial matrix and/or
active growth factors are deposited along the implant’s surface.
The implant’s surface topography and chemistry influence the
bone development around the implant.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the implication of having direct bone contact and the absence of a
periodontal ligament on the prosthetic superstructure?

258

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

• Figure 12-7 Collection of endosteal blade implant designs for restoring single or adjacent teeth.

• Figure 12-8 Collection of endosteal implants for partial arch restorations.

• Figure 12-9 Collection of different designs and materials used for endosseous implants.

Implant-supported restorations differ from tooth-supported
restorations in that the former lack a periodontal ligament, which
reduces shear stress and strain, provides shock absorption, and
reduces the development of dangerously high occlusal forces.
The benefits of the periodontal ligament reduce the potential for

inadvertent damage to the tooth or restoration. Ceramic materials are brittle by nature, and because of inherent processing flaws,
they cannot withstand any stress above their yield point, which is
equivalent to their tensile strength. These stresses can be generated during occlusal loading. Implants, on the other hand, are
directly anchored to the bone and cannot readily flex laterally
under extremely high occlusal loads to relieve some of the excessive loading. Vult von Steyern et al. (2005) analyzed the fracture
strength of all-ceramic prostheses on abutment teeth and implants
in vitro. They concluded that implant-supported ceramic prostheses fractured at higher loads than those supported by natural teeth
because of the lack of a periodontal ligament. This indicates that
the supporting structures, in this case the implants, are subjected
to higher stress levels. However, clinical studies have shown that
the complication rate for implant-supported FDPs is 30% over 5
years, whereas that for tooth-supported FDPs is 27.6% over the
same time period, indicating no real difference in survival of the
restoration between the two types of support.
Conversely, studies have analyzed whether the type of prosthetic material can affect the longevity of an implant. Brånemark
and Skalak advocated the use of acrylic for the prosthetic superstructure to act as a shock absorber and essentially dissipate the
load on the implants and the bone surrounding them. Acrylic,
noble metal alloys, and ceramic are being used in implant superstructures. In the absence of a periodontal ligament, minimizing
the load along the bone–implant interface is logical. However,

CHAPTER 12

TABLE 12-1

Dental Implants

259

Mechanical Properties and Density of Metallic and Ceramic Implant Materials

Material

Grade or Condition

Yield Strength
(MPa)

Elongation (%)

Modulus of
Elasticity (GPa)

Tensile Strength
(MPa)

Density (g/cm3)

CP titanium

1

170

24

102

240

4.5

2

275

20

102

345

4.5

3

380

18

102

450

4.5

4

483

15

104

550

4.5

Ti-6AI-4 V

860

10

113

930

4.4

Ti-6AI-4 V ELI

795

10

113

860

4.4

Ti-15Zr

953

Co-Cr-Mo

103.7

Cast

450

8

240

700

8.0

Annealed

190

40

200

490

8.0

Cold-worked

690

12

200

860

8.0

Stainless steel
*

Aluminum oxide

Polycrystalline

400 (500/flexure)

0.1

380

220

3.96

Zirconium oxide

Y2O3 (stabilized)

1200 (flexure)

0.1

200

350

6.0

Cortical bone

N/A

1

18

140

0.7

Dentin

N/A

0

18.3

52

2.2

Enamel

N/A

0

84

10

3.0

*

ASTM Standard: minimum values.

there is no evidence to associate the use of any prosthetic material
with the longevity and survival of the implants.

CRITICAL QUESTION

& 3URVWKHVLV

What is the purpose of pretreating implant surfaces?

% $EXWPHQW

Implant Components
To understand the material characteristics and function of an
implant, one must first be knowledgeable about the numerous
component parts. Although each implant system varies, the
parts are basically consistent. The body of the implant (called
a fixture for the Brånemark system) (Figure 12-10, A) is the
implant component that engages with bone. Depending on the
implant system, the body section can have different surfaces—
threaded, grooved, perforated, plasma-sprayed, sand-blasted, or
coated. These characteristics are often classified as subtraction
(threading, grooves, perforations, sand-blasting, or acid-etching)
or addition (plasma spray and coating) types. Each surface type
is meant to enhance bone integration and primary stability; that
is, increased surface area enhances bone integration, and better
cortex engagement plays an important role in immediate and
long-term bone anchorage. The coated or plasma-sprayed biomaterials, discussed later in this chapter, are used to enhance
attachment to bone. The second component (Figure 12-10, B)
is the transmucosal abutment, which provides the connection

$ ,PSODQW
IL[WXUH

• Figure 12-10 Diagram of implant components. A, The implant fixture
(endosteal root-form). B, Transmucosal abutment serving as the attachment between fixture and the actual prosthesis. C, The actual prosthesis,
which can either be cemented, screwed, or swaged.

260

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

between the implant body and the intraoral prosthesis to be fabricated (Figure 12-10, C), which will provide intraoral function.
The abutment is usually connected to the implant body by means
of a screw; however, the abutment can also be cemented or connected by a Morse taper-type design. Abutments can become
engaged to the implant body either by an internal or external
geometry (initially a hexagon) within the implant body, which
also serves as an antirotation device and is particularly important for single-unit restorations. The last part of an implant is
the prosthesis. The prosthesis can be attached to the abutments
through the use of screws, cement, precision attachments, magnets, or other designs, such as those used for removable implant
overdentures.

Implant Surgical Placement
Placement and restoration of implants intended to integrate with
bone are usually performed in stages. The first stage, or stage 1,
occurs when the implant is surgically placed into the bone (Figure
12-11). The implant is left within the bone (passive) for a period of
months, depending on the bone quality, and allowed to heal and
become integrated. A secondary surgery, or stage 2, is sometimes
required whereby the implant is uncovered and exposed through
the oral environment (Figure 12-12). This exposure is performed

4 to 6 months after implant placement and after proper bone
healing has occurred.
The restorative phase then follows the placement of abutments
and a crown, a partial denture, or a removable denture, with or
without a bar construct. Some implant systems use only one surgical intervention, where the implant is immediately placed in contact with the oral environment and is sometimes able to function
in a limited way within days. Some of these systems have even
been advocated for immediate functional loading, with reports of
relative success.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
When can an implant restoration be considered successful? What criteria
are used to determine this success? What clinical situations can affect the
success rate of dental implants?

Evaluation of Clinical Success
There have been several long-standing debates about what is
considered successful in implant dentistry. Some consider that
the encapsulation of an implant with a pseudoperiodontium is
a successful implant condition. The most frequently cited success

B

A

C

• Figure 12-11 Implant placement, Stage 1 surgery. A, Sequential twist drills used for osteotomy. B, Depth
pins used to confirm osteotomy and implant parallelism. C, Implant placement following the correct angulation. (Courtesy Dr. Luiz Gonzaga.)

A

B

C

• Figure 12-12 Implant placement, Stage 2 surgery. A, Tissue evaluation pre uncovering. B, Healing
abutment on implant after uncovering. Minimal crestal incision, tissue punch or laser can be used as long
as keratinized mucosa is present. C, Impression coping on implant to facilitate fabrication of provisional
restoration at the same appointment. (Courtesy Dr. Luiz Gonzaga.)

CHAPTER 12

criteria from the 1970s are those in the publication edited by
Schnitman and Schulman (1979). More recently, summaries from
Cochran and Fritz (1996) and Albrektsson et al. (1986 and 1991)
are often cited.

Criteria of Success
Proposed early requirements included (1) implant mobility
less than 1 mm when tested clinically; (2) no evidence of x-ray
radiolucency; (3) bone loss less than one-third the height of the
implants; (4) absence of infection, damage to structures, and
violation of body cavities—inflammation, if present, must be
amenable to treatment; and (5) a success rate of 75% or more
after 5 years of functional service using objective criteria for
evaluation. As an example, these conditions were somewhat
different from the criteria of Albrektsson et al. (1986), which
included the following: (1) the implant must be immobile when
tested clinically; (2) there must be no evidence of periapical x-ray
radiolucency; (3) vertical bone loss should be less than 0.2 mm
annually following the implant’s first year; (4) absence of signs
and symptoms such as pain, infections, neuropathies, paresthesias, or violation of the mandibular canal; and (5) a success rate
of 85% or more at the end of a 5-year observation period and
80% at the end of a 10-year period when evaluated by objective
criteria for success.
Smith and Zarb (1989) recommended an addition to Albrektsson’s criteria by stating that the patient’s and dentist’s satisfaction
should be the primary consideration and that esthetic conditions
should be met. Patient satisfaction and patient attitude toward
the prosthesis have been included in some subsequent lists of criteria for success. Although these criteria have become more stringent in recent years, success in implant dentistry is still difficult
to quantify.
In 2008, the International Congress of Oral Implantologists
arrived at a consensus for rating implant success, survival, and failure. The scale ranges from 1 to 4, with 1 being deemed successful
and optimal health and 4 as clinical failure. The consensus evaluates the presence of pain or tenderness, mobility, bone loss, and
exudate history (Table 12-2).
Standardized criteria for success should continue to evolve to
enable proper evaluation of implant dentistry as the systems and
treatments change over time.

Evaluation of Failure
Most recently, there has been much focus on peri-implant diseases because the diagnosis of these has never been fully established. As such, implant failures resulting from peri-implantitis
range anywhere from 11% to 55%, and the true prevalence
of this disease is elusive. Peri-implantitis and perimucositis are
defined as mucosal inflammation surrounding the implant with
or without 2 mm or more of bone loss after restoration (implant
loading). The incidence of perimucositis and peri-implantitis on
patients who receive implants varies from 20% to 90% within
a period of 5 to 11 years. There are no definitive interventions
associated with successful therapy of peri-implant disease. With
more and more implants being placed in lieu of traditional
fixed and removable dental prosthesis to replace missing teeth,
peri-implantitis is becoming a major dental health issue. In
2017 the World Workshop on the Classification of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases and Conditions was convened
to outline proper identification of peri-implant diseases. The

TABLE 12-2

Dental Implants

261

International Congress of Oral
Implantologists Health Scale for Rating
the Success or Failure of Dental Implants

Quality Scale

Clinical Condition

I. Success

No pain or tenderness at function
0 mobility
<2-mm bone loss
No exudate history

II. Satisfactory

No pain or tenderness at function
0 mobility
2- to 4-mm bone loss
No exudate history

III. Compromised

May have pain or tenderness at function
0 mobility
>4-mm bone loss and <1/2 implant length
No exudate history

IV. Failure

Pain or tenderness at function
Mobility
Bone loss >1/2 implant length
Uncontrolled exudates
No longer in the mouth

From Misch CE, et al: Implant success survival and failure: International Congress of Oral
Implantologists, Pisa, Italy, Consensus Conference, Implant Dent 17:5–15, 2008.

diagnostic criteria for peri-implant diseases are shown in Table 12-3.
Although the causes of peri-implantitis and peri-mucositis are
still being investigated, there is a strong link between the incidence of the disease and chronic periodontitis, poor plaque
control, and absence of regular implant maintenance. The links
between systemic risk factors, such as smoking and diabetes,
were found to be inconclusive.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the primary mechanism of failure involved with dental implants?

Longevity of Dental Implants
The popularity of dental implants to restore full or partial
edentulism has been the result of predictable outcomes with
high success rates. Five-year success rates of 96% to 98% are
reported for mandibular implants and 94% to 96% for maxillary implants, depending on the quality of bone, surgical technique, and primary implant stability. Implant failure can occur
at an early stage or a late stage. Early-stage failures occur prior to
loading or placement of the prosthesis and are most commonly
associated with poor surgical techniques or inability to achieve
primary stability.
Brånemark and Albrektsson reported strict protocols required
to achieve proper osseointegration. These include following
proper aseptic techniques and allowing the bone to heal around
the implant for a period of 4 to 6 months. The healing process
allows the bone to be generated around the implant free from
bacteria and micromotion, which can disrupt bone deposition
around the implant. Micromotion above 150 μm has been shown
to promote soft tissue deposition and eventual encapsulation of
the implant body with fibrous tissue. This occurrence is classified

262

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

TABLE 12-3 Classification of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases and Conditions

Peri-Implant Soft Tissue Inflammation (Redness,
Swelling, Profuse Bleeding on Probing)

Additional Bone Loss After Initial
Healing

Probing Depth

Peri-implant health

None

None

None

Peri-implant
mucositis

Present with line or drop of bleeding within 30
seconds after probing

None

None

Peri-implantitis

Present

Radiographic evidence of bone loss
after initial healing*

Increased probing depth compared
with probing depth at delivery of
prosthesis

*

In the absence of baseline radiographs, a combination of bone loss ≥3 mm, bleeding on probing, and probing depth ≥6 mm is indicative of peri-implantitis.

as a failure of osseointegration. Allowing the bone surrounding
the implant to heal necessitates a two-step surgical technique for
implant placement, as mentioned earlier. In 1990 Schnitman
et al. reported on the success of immediate loading of dental
implants. This technique eliminates the need for a second surgery
and allows the implant to be used immediately to support a temporary or permanent prosthesis (Figure 12-13). There are mixed
results regarding the success rates between immediately loaded
and conventionally loaded implants. Although the success rates
vary, there is a consensus that immediate loading constitutes a
more technique-sensitive process and patient-selective endeavor.
Researchers conclude that if these guidelines are followed, the
success rates for immediately loaded implants are more favorable.
As with conventional implants, primary stability is important in
achieving proper osseointegration. The problem with immediately loading implants is that micromotion can occur and jeopardize the bone formation around the implant body. However,
research has shown that there is a range of allowable micromotion
from 30 to 150 μm, where bone deposition is not hindered. The
advantage of immediate loading is shorter treatment time, which
leads to greater patient convenience and comfort by reducing the
number of surgeries and allowing the immediate placement of a
prosthesis.
Late-stage failures occur after loading or placement of a prosthesis and can be the result of complications stemming from
uncontrolled periodontal disease or overloading of the implant.
Overloading can be caused by lateral or oblique forces exerted on
the prosthesis from improper occlusal loading or parafunctional
habits. Bone is susceptible to microfractures or fatigue fractures,
depending on the type and amount of occlusal load being exerted.
Once the bone reaches the tolerance limit for the occlusal loads,
these fractures can occur and can lead to implant failure. Excessive
bone deformation has been shown to occur between 2000 and
3000 microstrain units, and pathological overloading can be seen
at over 4000 microstrain units. One thousand (1000) microstrain
units equals 0.1% deformation.

which can, in turn, lead to bone resorption and microfracture.
Conversely, minimal load transfer to bone can lead to bone atrophy from disuse. Rough surfaces along the implant are typically
conducive to transferring more load to the bone as a result of the
increased surface-area contact. An increase in contact area also
reduces localized stress. This reduction in localized stress decreases
the strain around the implants. On the other hand, smooth-surfaced implants have the opposite effect, as evidenced by resorption
along the marginal areas, where there is a smooth transition from
the implant to bone.
The type of prosthesis used can also influence how the forces are
transferred along the implant–bone interfaces. Prosthesis design
should minimize long cantilever arms to avoid offset loads or high
bending moments on the implants. Lateral forces are not tolerated as well as direct axial loading. Cement-retained prostheses
have been found to be more favorable in maintaining proper axial
loading as opposed to screw-retained restorations. The absence of
a screw hole allows proper occlusal design for the prosthesis to
adequately direct loading to the implant. Conversely, the presence
of a screw hole will redirect occlusal forces and introduce bending
moments to the implant.

CRITICAL QUESTION

Metallic Implants

Which factors in the implant and prosthesis design affect the load transfer to
bone?

Three metallic-based systems have been used to make dental
implants: CPTi and titanium alloys, stainless steel, and cobaltchromium-molybdenum alloys. These metallic implants undergo
one or more of several surface treatments prior to final packaging
for implantation. Some of these modifications include passivation,
anodization, ion implantation, and texturing by several different

A delicate balance must be achieved in load transfer from
implant to bone to maintain proper bone health. Excessive occlusal forces lead to overloading of the bone surrounding the implant,

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which biomaterial is best for certain types of implants?

Implant Biomaterials
The most commonly used implant materials are made from metallic biomaterials. Implants also differ in their surface condition.
Some implants are machined and finished; others are coated with
different types of biomaterials. Of the four types of implants by
design, endosteal implants are the most commonly used for dental
applications. Thus the nature of the biomaterials used for endosteal implants is a central focus of the following discussion.

CHAPTER 12

Dental Implants

263

• Figure 12-13 Immediate placement of dental implants. A, Fractured maxillary central incisor seen radiographically. B, Central incisior extracted. C, Implant placed immediately after extraction. D, Temporary
abutment placed for temporary crown. E, Final restoration completed. (From Garg AK: Implant Dentistry,
ed 2, St. Louis, 2010, Mosby.)

methods. Passivation refers to the enhancement of the oxide layer
to minimize the release of metallic ions as a result of surface transfers. Minimization of ion release contributes to biocompatibility.
Passivation treatments can be performed through immersion in
40% nitric acid or anodization, a process by which an electrical current is passed through the implant when it is placed in a
specialized solution. The former method of treatment minimally
increases the thickness of the oxide layer, whereas the latter treatment can result in a thicker oxide layer, which has been shown
to be beneficial in enhancing corrosion resistance. Surface texturing increases the surface area of the implant and enhances
tissue interactions by increasing the area through which stresses
are transferred to bone. This is accomplished by several methods,
including plasma spraying, acid-etching, and blasting with aluminum oxide or another ceramic or ceramic-like material. Plasma
spraying involves melting materials under high temperatures and

then spraying the material onto the surface of the implant. This
method can be used with Ti or various ceramic coatings, as discussed later in this chapter. The increased implant surface area
should remain passive because a greater surface area influences
the overall release of metallic ions. Another surface modification
for the implant is ion implantation, which consists of bombarding the implant surface of the implant with high-energy ions up
to a surface depth of a few micrometers. This procedure has been
claimed to increase the corrosion resistance of the titanium alloys
through the formation of a titanium nitride (TiN) surface layer
if the ion is nitrogen.

Titanium and Titanium Alloy
Titanium exists in nature as rutile (TiO2) or ilmenite (FeTiO3)
compounds and requires specific extraction methods to be recovered in the elemental state. Titanium has several favorable physical

264

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

properties, which include a low density of 4.5 g/cm3 and a relatively high flexure strength comparable to that of cast forms of
cobalt and stainless-steel alloys. Titanium is very resistant to corrosion because of a passivating layer of titanium oxide, which is
formed instantly on the surface. A new oxide layer re-forms on the
surface as soon as this oxide is lost because of mechanical removal.
This oxide layer can slowly become thicker over time and can
reach a maximum of 25 nm in 4 years. In vitro, this layer can be
removed by using corrosive acids or ion-etching. Pure titanium
has the ability to form several oxides, including TiO, TiO2, and
Ti2O3. Of these, TiO2 is considered the most stable and is found
after exposure to physiological conditions.
The most commonly used titanium products are grades 1 to 4
of CPTi. Titanium alloys, namely, Ti-6Al-4V and Ti-6Al-7Nb, are
used in extra-low interstitial (ELI) grades. The ELI contains low
levels of oxygen dissolved in interstitial sites in the metal. Lower
amounts of oxygen and iron improve the ductility of the ELI titanium alloy, which can be alloyed with different elements to modify
its properties. As discussed in Chapter 9, Titanium Alloys, alloying elements can be added to titanium alloys to stabilize either the
α or β phase. Aluminum acts as an alpha stabilizer for the purpose
of increasing strength and decreasing density. Vanadium and niobium are beta-phase stabilizers, which are used to minimize the
formation of TiAl3 to approximately 6% or less and to decrease the
alloy’s susceptibility to corrosion. Except for CPTi, the modulus
of elasticity of Ti-6Al-4V is closer to that of bone than that of
any other widely used metallic implant biomaterial. Newer titanium alloys have been developed, including Ti-13Nb-13Zr and
Ti-15Mo-2.8Nb. These alloys use other phase stabilizers instead
of aluminum and vanadium and may exhibit greater strength and
corrosion resistance.
As listed previously, CPTi comes in different grades, from
CP grades I to IV. The compositions of these metals in weight
percentage are given in Table 12-4. The strength of CPTi is less
than that of Ti-6Al-4V alloy, although the modulus of elasticity values are comparable (Table 12-1). The table shows that Ti
alloys maintain the fine balance between sufficient strength to
resist fracture under occlusal forces and to retain a lower modulus of elasticity for more uniform stress distributions across the
bone–implant interface.
Most recently, binary alloys such as Ti-Nb, Ti-Hf, and Ti-Ta
have been examined for use as dental implants. Ti-15Zr was
introduced clinically under the trade name Roxolid (Straumann,
Basel, Switzerland) for use as narrow implants where regular-size

TABLE 12-4

implants are not indicated. The claim is that these alloys are
more biocompatible than the current Ti-6Al-4V alloy with the
elimination of Al and V, which have been known to cause cytotoxic reactions and chromosomal damage. The Roxolid demonstrates improved mechanical properties, with a tensile strength
of 953 MPa compared with 680 MPa for Ti-6Al-4V and 310
MPa for CPTi. There are limited studies on this material; however, these studies have shown that there is no cytotoxic behavior
associated with this alloy, there is greater bone–implant contact
(BIC) after 6 weeks of osseointegration, and it has similar elastic
characteristics with the Ti-6Al-4V with higher strength. As with
all implant materials, long-term clinical data are needed to fully
ascertain risks and benefits.

Stainless Steel
Used in the form of surgical austenitic steel, these metals have
18% chromium for corrosion resistance and 8% nickel to stabilize
the austenitic structure. Stainless steel is most often used in the
wrought and heat-treated state and possesses high strength and
ductility. Despite its low cost and ease of fabrication, this alloy is
not widely used in implant dentistry because of a potential allergic response to nickel and a susceptibility to crevice and pitting
corrosion. The corrosion products for stainless steel contain iron,
chromium, nickel, and molybdenum. These elements or their ions
can accumulate in the tissues surrounding the implant and subsequently be transported to other parts of the body to produce a
potentially unfavorable response. Surface treatments such as surface passivation and ion implantation are used to improve the corrosion resistance, although austenitic stainless steels are still prone
to localized attack in long-term applications.
Cobalt-Chromium-Molybdenum Alloy
This class of alloys generally consists of 63% cobalt, 30% chromium, and 5% molybdenum, with small amounts of carbon,
manganese, and nickel. Molybdenum is a stabilizer, chromium
provides the passivating effect to ensure corrosion resistance, and
carbon serves as a hardener. Vitallium is the representative material
of Co-Cr-Mo alloy, which was introduced by Venable in the late
1930s. This metal was initially shown to lack electrochemical activity and any tissue reaction. Ticonium, a Ni-Cr-Mo-Be alloy, was
also used as a dental implant material, although this alloy revealed
some adverse issues related to corrosion and biocompatibility. In
later studies, Vitallium was associated with chronic inflammation
and no osseous integration for several endosteal and subperiosteal

Composition of CP Titanium and Alloys (Percent by Weight)*

Titanium

N

C

H

Fe

O

Al

V

Ti

CP grade I

0.03

0.08

0.015

0.20

0.18

—

—

Balance

CP grade II

0.03

0.08

0.015

0.30

0.25

—

—

Balance

CP grade III

0.05

0.08

0.015

0.30

0.35

—

—

Balance

CP grade IV

0.05

0.08

0.015

0.5

0.4

—

—

Balance

Ti-6Al-4 V alloy

0.05

0.08

0.015

0.3

0.2

5.50–6.75

3.50–4.50

Balance

Ti-6Al-4 V (ELI alloy)

0.05

0.08

0.012

0.25

0.13

5.50–6.50

3.50–4.50

Balance

*

ASTM Standard: minimum values.

CHAPTER 12

designs. To improve implant performance, inert biomaterials in
the form of aluminum oxide and other ceramics were deposited
on alloy surfaces. Aluminum oxide and zirconium oxide coated
on cobalt alloys were found to have no effect on improving the
biological acceptability of the implants evaluated. Co-Cr-Mo
alloys have a high elastic modulus and resistance to corrosion.
The additions of ceramic coatings such as calcium phosphate did
not significantly alter the bulk portions of the alloy. Studies of
cobalt alloys have shown that their lower ductility is a result of
the agglomeration of compounds rich in carbon, chromium, and
molybdenum. Also, studies have shown that ductility is improved
by reducing the carbon content and controlling the processing of
the alloy. Co-Cr-Mo and stainless-steel alloys continue to be used
for some implants, such as subperiosteal and transosteal implants
and ramus frames, because of their castability, mechanical properties, and lower cost.

Ceramic and Ceramic-Like Coated Metal
Implant Systems
Several synthetic and biological materials have been used specifically for the treatment of bone defects, ridge augmentation, and
osteoporotic lesions. These biomaterials can either be plasmasprayed or blasted onto the metallic implant to produce ceramiclike surfaces, which can be more thermodynamically stable,
hydrophilic, nonconductive of heat and electricity, and bioactive
at the surface, thereby producing a high-strength integration with
bone and the surrounding tissues. The term bioactive refers to a
variety of inorganic biomaterials that can enhance integration
with bone. These are generally brittle and may have high elastic
moduli and low tensile strengths.
Recently, ceramic implants made from ytrria-stabilized zirconia
(3Y-TZP) were shaped into actual threaded implants and implant
abutments. Ceramic implants can withstand only relatively low
tensile or shear stresses induced by occlusal loads, but they can
tolerate quite high levels of compressive stress (Table 12-1).
Additionally, these implants have a more esthetic appearance
than titanium, with increased wear and corrosion resistance.
Aluminum oxide (Al2O3) is used as a standard biomaterial for
ceramic implants because of its inertness (biostability), with no
evidence of adverse in vivo reactions. Zirconia (ZrO2) has also
demonstrated a high degree of inertness. These types of ceramic
implants are not bioactive in that they do not promote the formation of bone. This property is double-edged because this also
minimizes bacterial affinity and therefore the incidence of periimplantitis (see following discussion). These materials have high
strength, stiffness, and hardness and function very well for some
designs of dental implants. However, there have been limited
clinical data on these zirconia implants, and some of the results
have been catastrophic, with early fracture being much higher
than the titanium implants for both the implants themselves and
the abutments.
Of the synthetic types of materials, calcium phosphates are
the most successful for grafting and bone augmentation. This
performance is probably associated with the fact that bone is
composed of 60% to 70% calcium phosphate. These materials
are nonimmunogenic and are biocompatible with host tissues.
The two most commonly used calcium phosphates are hydroxyapatite (HA) or Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2 and tricalcium phosphate
(TCP), Ca3(PO4)2. Hydroxyapatite and tricalcium phosphate
are used as bone-graft materials in granular or block form to

Dental Implants

265

serve as a template for the formation of new bone. Because these
materials are known to promote and achieve a direct bond of the
implant to hard tissues, they are classified as bioactive. Both also
promote vertically directed bone growth and a relatively strong
bond to bone.
Bioactivity is defined in the ninth edition of the Glossary of
Prosthodontic Terms as the “reactive potential of implant material
that allows interaction and bond formation with living tissues;
active potential depends on material composition, topography,
and chemical or physical surface variations.” More specifically,
the bioactivity of bone with an implanted material indicates the
bond of bone to hydroxyapatite. HA, TCP, and other calcium
phosphates are bioactive, in part, as a result of the release of calcium and phosphate ions within the surrounding tissue. Studies
have revealed several differences in the tissue response to these
materials after implantation. The beta form of TCP is resorbed
more rapidly than HA and results in a breakdown of TCP. Some
have reported a replacement of mesenchymal cells with features
resembling osteoprogenitor cells. Studies have also shown that
after 4 weeks of implantation, osteocytes accumulate adjacent
to HA granules, indicating the possibility of osteogenesis with
these implants. This is one of the justifications for using calcium phosphate compounds for coatings on implants placed
into bone.
The use of these calcium phosphates as coating biomaterials for
metallic implants is directly related to their physical and chemical properties. The more crystalline the HA coatings, the more
resistant they are to clinical dissolution. A minimum of 50% crystalline HA is considered a preferable concentration for coatings.
Dissolution of the coating occurs at a higher rate with the more
amorphous structural conditions. Heat treatment after the deposition process improves the crystallinity of HA. The major advantage of these ceramic-like coatings is that they can stimulate the
adaptation of bone and very often exhibit a more intimate boneto-implant contact compared with a metallic surface. The amount
of bone integration has been compared between metallic implants
and ceramic-coated implants in numerous studies; these studies
suggest that there is greater bone-to-implant integration with the
HA-coated implants during the early stages of osseointegration.
However, other studies indicate that there is no significant difference between the HA-coated and the uncoated implants after
longer observation periods.
The bioglasses (SiO2-CaO-Na2O-P2O5-MgO) are another
form of bioactive ceramic biomaterials. These materials are
known to form a carbonated hydroxyapatite layer in vivo as a
result of their calcium and phosphorus content. The formation
of this layer is initiated by the migration of calcium, phosphate,
silica, and sodium ions into tissue as a result of external pH
changes. A silica-rich gel layer forms on the surface as elements
are released. The silicon depletion initiates a migration of calcium
and phosphate ions to the silica gel layer from both the bioglass
surface and tissue fluids. This results in the formation of a calcium-phosphorus layer that stimulates osteoblasts to proliferate.
These osteoblasts produce collagen fibrils that become incorporated into the calcium-phosphorus layer and are later anchored
by the calcium-phosphorus crystals. This layer is 100 to 200 mm
thick and has been shown to form a strong bone–bioglass interface. Bioglasses are classified as bioactive materials because they
stimulate the formation of bone. They are more often used as
grafting materials for ridge augmentation or bony defects than
as coating materials for metallic implants because the interfacial
bond strength of bioglasses with the metallic substitute and other

266

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

ceramic substrates is weak and is subject to dissolution in vivo.
Despite their favorable osteoinductive ability, bioglasses are also
very brittle, which makes them unsuitable for use for some stressbearing implant applications.

where parts touch one another and galvanic corrosion might
exist. In general, the titanium and cobalt alloys are relatively
stable, and both have been combined electrochemically with the
high-noble dental alloys. Base metal and amalgam combinations
are a concern.

Other Implant Materials
Carbon and a carbon compound (C and SiC) were introduced in
the 1960s for use in dental implantology. Vitreous carbon, which
elicits a very minimal response from host tissues, is one of the
most biocompatible materials. Vitreous carbons are the result of
the controlled thermal degradation of a preformed polymeric solid
that leaves a relatively pure glassy carbon residue that possesses the
glassy and ceramic properties of graphite. Studies have confirmed
that the morphology of the bone–implant interface is similar to
that associated with an HA implant. Compared with the metallic implants, carbon is more inert under physiological conditions
and has a modulus of elasticity similar to that of dentin and bone.
Thus carbon deforms at a rate similar to those tissues, enhancing
the transmission of biomechanical forces. However, carbon is susceptible to fracture because of the brittleness and susceptibility of
this material under tensile stress in the presence of surface flaws,
which is usually generated as a component of flexural loading.
Carbon-based biomaterials have also been used for ceramic-like
coatings on metallic implants.

Critical Question
With the abundance of implant materials to choose from, how does a clinician
know which biomaterial is best for a particular implant application?

Selecting an Implant System
Because of the abundance of different implant biomaterials and
implant systems, knowing the indications for their use is important. Perhaps the most important consideration is the strength of
the implant biomaterial and the type of bone in which the implant
will be placed. The other factors to consider are the implant design,
abutment choices, abutment availability, surface finish, and biomechanical considerations of restorative treatments.

Characteristics of the Material
The strength of an implant is often a consideration, depending
on the area of placement. If the implant is located in a zone of
higher force transfer (e.g., in the posterior area of the arch), the
clinician might consider using a higher-strength material such as
grade IV CPTi or one of the titanium alloys. Some controversy
exists as to which titanium metal or alloy to use because some
researchers believe that aluminum and vanadium can be toxic if
released in sufficient quantities. Other considerations for selection include a history of implant fracture in the placement area
of interest, the use of narrower implants, and a history of occlusal or parafunctional habits. Anterior implants, which are designated for use in narrow spaces, have smaller diameters, in the
range of 3.25 mm or less. Conversely, single implants placed in
posterior areas have larger diameters, up to 7 or 8 mm. Selection
of the implant biomaterial must also be evaluated in terms of the
abutment and intraoral biomaterials and dental materials. Electrochemical studies of the corrosion of metals now provide lists
of acceptable and unacceptable combinations under conditions

CRITICAL QUESTION
How do implant characteristics and the quality and quantity of bone affect the
survival time of implants?

Characteristics of HA Coating
There has been much debate about when to use metallic or HAcoated implants. As mentioned earlier, HA-coated implants
stimulate bone growth and have been shown to have a greater percentage of bone-to-implant integration. However, there are also
some studies showing that HA is a very unstable implant material
under some conditions (inflammation, infections, micromotion)
and can prove detrimental to bone and tissues in the long term.
As one example, Gottlander and Albrektsson (1991) examined
the bone-to-implant contact area both at 6 weeks and 12 months
for HA-coated and CPTi implants. They concluded that the
bone-to-implant contact area at 6 weeks was 65% for HA and
59% for Ti. However, at 12 months, Ti exhibited a 75% contact
area versus 53% for HA. Some contend that the interactions of
HA with bone are biologically unstable because of this interface
exchange. As mentioned earlier, HA can also be subjected to dissolution, and higher crystallinity must be maintained to minimize this occurrence. Unfortunately, some amount of amorphous
biomaterial is often present during plasma-spray processing of
the coating, and this substance is susceptible to dissolution. The
long-term stability of HA-coated implants is still very controversial. Although the bond between HA and bone is considered to
be strong, the mechanical stability of the interface between the
coating and the metallic substrate may be unstable under some
conditions.
Some studies have shown that the survival rate of HA-coated
implants is initially higher than that for titanium plasmasprayed implants, but in one study, the survival rate significantly
decreased after 4 years. Failures were associated with inflammation of the surrounding tissues, with delamination and exfoliation of the implant. Some implants were retrieved before failure;
these revealed partial loss of the HA coating, with flattening
and thinning in some areas and an increase in local Cl and Mg
ions. The implications of these factors relative to clinical implant
failure remain unknown. Another concern is the adherence of
microorganisms to the HA surface. A study of failed titanium
plasma-sprayed and HA-coated implants revealed a colonization of coccoid and rod-shaped bacteria on HA implants, possibly as a result of the bioreactivity of HA. The roughened surface
of the HA implants can also contribute to plaque growth, periimplantitis, and dissolution once the coating is exposed. This can
decrease the chance of long-term survival.
Another study compared the torsional strength of CPTi,
Ti-6Al-4V, and HA-coated implants ankylosed in bone. The
torque of separating for a period of up to 4 months ranged from
74 N-cm for the uncoated implants to 186 N-cm (HA-coated
implants). These torsion-resistance values reflect the rotational
shear resistance of the implant. Thus HA-coated implant surfaces
in this circumstance provided greater implant–bone interface area,

CHAPTER 12

Quality 1

Quality 2

Quality 3

Quality 4

• Figure 12-14 Four qualities of bone.

higher shear tolerance, and higher torsional strengths in areas
where a sinus lift procedure had been conducted.

HA Coating and Bone Quality
As previously stated, the type of bone in which the implant will be
placed is of critical importance. Bone for implantation has been
classified into four types: type I consists of mostly homogeneous
compact bone, type II consists of a thick layer of compact bone
surrounding a core of dense trabecular bone, type III is a thin layer
of cortical bone surrounding a core of dense trabecular bone, and
type IV is composed of a thin layer of cortical bone with a core of
low-density trabecular bone (Figure 12-14). Type IV bone is by
far the most compromised bone environment for implant stability
because of its inadequate quality and quantity.
In spite of all its possible disadvantages, hydroxyapatite has
multiple indications for implant applications. Studies reporting on
the biological response to both the coated and uncoated implants
suggest that HA-coated implants were interfaced intimately with
bone and that the mineralized matrix extended into the microporosity of the HA coating. Numerous osteocytes were found along
the periphery of HA-coated implants, which indicates that these
implants are a better option for areas of poor bone quality, such as
the maxilla. In one study, Brånemark-type titanium implants were
evaluated in type IV bone, and a survival rate of 63% was found
for mandibular implants and 56% for maxillary implants. These
values are lower than the survival rates of 90% or more when these
implants were placed in type I and II bone.
Another study compared the survival rates of titanium screwtype implants and HA-coated cylinders in type IV bone. At 36
months, Ti implants had a survival rate of 78% compared with
98% for HA implants. At 48 months, this survival rate fell to
75% for the metal implants. In a follow-up study, titanium screws
exhibited a 91% 3-year survival rate and 89% for a 7-year period
in type IV maxillary bone. These rates can be compared with a
survival level of 95% for HA implants during a 7-year period. All
of these studies indicate that HA-coated implants have a greater
survival rate in type IV bone. Therefore many recommend the use
of HA-coated implants in areas of poor or less-than-ideal bone as
sites for implant placement. The bone height available for implant
placement is also a factor in considering which type of implant to
use. A 5-year study revealed a 70% failure rate in bone for titanium
screws with an implant length of 8 mm. HA-coated screws of the
same length had only a 4% failure rate over this period. There was
no significant difference in the failure rates between the two types
of implants when the length of the screws was increased to 12 mm.
Another indication for HA-coated implants was their use in
fresh extraction sites, owing to the initial stability afforded by

Dental Implants

267

these types of implants. Implant placement can sometimes be
performed immediately after an extraction. Initial stability has
been reported to be difficult to obtain in some of these cases, and
this could lead to implant loss. A comparison of the survival rate
of HA-coated implants, metallic implants, and hollow basket
implants was made after 7 years of immediate implant placement.
Survival rates of 95%, 90%, and 82% were found, respectively.
The implant–bone interface contact area was also shown to be
62% for HA-coated implants and 29% for metallic implants after
28 days of placement.
Further advances in the field of dental surgery have allowed
placement of implants in areas where bone was not normally present or had been lost. Maxillary and nasal sinus lifts are commonplace in partially dentate individuals who need an implant-based
reconstruction. Bone grafts have enabled the placement of a sinus
lift in posterior areas where bone is deficient. Unfortunately, the
quality of bone produced from these bone grafts is of lower quality,
and an implant needs a substantial implant–bone contact area for
function. Most of these implant sites oppose fully dentate arches,
which normally exert a higher amount of masticatory force. Thus
initial stability, enhanced bone integration, and higher strength
are important implant properties for these locations. Studies have
revealed that HA-coated implants exhibited a push shear bond
strength of 7 MPa versus 10 MPa for titanium metallic implants
after a period of 10 weeks. After 32 weeks, HA-coated implants
continued to have shear strengths five times greater than those of
metallic surface implants.
The controversy that the resorption of HA coating over time
could compromise long-term implant survival was examined
in a meta-analytic review by Lee et al. (2000) that reported the
outcomes of HA-coated implants in human clinical trials. This
review suggests that the survival rates are similar for both and
that the HA coating did not compromise the long-term survival
of these implants. Indications from reviews supporting the selection of HA-coated implants over titanium- or metal-surfaced
implants include (1) the need for greater bone–implant interface contact area, (2) the ability to place the implant in type IV
bone, (3) fresh extraction sites, and (4) newly grafted sites. It has
also been shown that the advantages of HA-coated implants are
mainly short term in nature and are related to the initial stability
of the implant, which most often determines its prerestorative
success or failure.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Several types of biocompatibility test data may be useful in selecting an
appropriate implant. What is the principal factor on the basis of which
an implant material should be selected as suitable or unsuitable for
osseointegration?

Biocompatibility of Implants
The concept of biomaterial biocompatibility does not refer to
total inertness but rather to the ability of a material to perform with an appropriate response in a specific application
(Chapter 17, Basic Concept of Biocompatibility). Biocompatibility is affected by the intrinsic nature of the material, in addition
to its design and construction. Therefore the state of biocompatibility may be specific to a particular situation or function. The
American Dental Association outlines some acceptance guidelines
for dental implants, including the following: (1) evaluation of

268

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

mechanical properties that ensure sufficient strength; (2) demonstration of ease of fabrication and sterilization potential without
material degradation; (3) safety and biocompatibility evaluation,
including cytotoxicity testing, and tissue interface characteristics;
(4) freedom from defects; and (5) at least two independent longitudinal prospective clinical studies demonstrating efficacy.
The primary surface interactions between an implant material and the host take place at the surface of the implant within
a region of approximately the size of one water molecule (about
0.275 nm). However, this does not mean that the implant–tissue interactions are isolated to this interface. Some studies have
reported high titanium levels in both the spleen and lungs of rabbits immediately after surgery, but these concentrations were well
within normal limits. In humans, Ti levels have been reported at
50 ppm, but they can reach levels of up to 200 ppm in tissues
surrounding some titanium implants. At this level, tissue discoloration may be visible, but the material is still well tolerated by
the body. Kasemo and Lausmaa (1991) demonstrated the dissolution of corrosion products into the bioliquid and adjacent tissues. Thus the outermost atomic layers of an implant are critical

regions associated with biochemical interactions of the implant–
tissue interface. These reports emphasize the importance of process controls and a high degree of standardization and surface
cleanliness in the production of implants. Most recently, there
has been a focus on titanium corrosion (Figure 12-15) as a possible cause of peri-implantitis. As the titanium corrodes as a result
of bacterial production of acidic toxins, the particles that lodge
in the peri-implant tissues are believed to elicit an inflammatory
response, which increases the progression of disease. To date,
there is no predictable treatment for peri-implantitis disease. The
recurrence rate after some form of therapy is usually 50%, and
the disease progression eventually leads to loss of the implant
and the prosthesis that the implant is supporting. Figure 12-16,
A shows biopsied tissue from a peri-implant site demonstrating
multiple titanium particles scattered throughout. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis was done to confirm this finding using x-ray diffraction analysis (Figure 12-16, B). Studies
have also shown the presence of yellow nail syndrome, which
results from systemic titanium leaching from titanium implants.
This syndrome can manifest with symptoms such as yellow nails

• Figure 12-15 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of implant corrosion demonstrating breakdown of the surface with retrieved failed implant on the left (A) and reference implant on the right (B). Note
increased roughened surfaces and increased corrosive landmarks on the failed implant. C, Corresponding
EDAX analysis of failed implant (left image) showing decreased Ti and increased Mg and Na, indicative of
corrosion. D, EDAX of reference implant (right image) for comparison.

A

B

• Figure 12-16 A, Biopsied sample along diseased peri-implant site demonstrating presence of particles
embedded in tissue (yellow arrows). B, Scanning electron miscroscopy (SEM) (×600) of biopsy sample
showing one particle approximatey 37 μm across (red circle) to be Ti by EDAX. (From Soler MD, Hsuv S-M,
Fares C, et al: Titanium corrosion in peri-implantitis, Materials (Basel). 2020;13(23):5488. doi:10.3390
/ma13235488.)

CHAPTER 12

and high titanium levels in the blood. Other manifestations
include chronic sinusitis, bronchiectasis, and pleural effusions.

Dental Implants

269

5
Fatigue and fracture

CRITICAL QUESTION

Biomechanics
The integration of bone with implants serves as the basis for the
biomechanical analyses performed for dental implants. Close
approximation of bone-integrated conditions with the surface
of an implant permits the transfer of forces and site-specific
stresses with elastic displacement of the bone and implant. The
stresses that are generated are highly affected by four main considerations: (1) masticatory factors (frequency, bite force, and
mandibular movements), (2) support for the prosthesis (implant
supported, implant–tissue supported, implant–tooth supported), (3) the mechanical properties of the materials involved
in the implant restoration (elastic modulus, yield strength, fracture strength, ductility, etc.), and (4) the design of the implant
body and the associated intraoral prostheses. One of the most
important variables affecting the close apposition of bone to
the implant surface is the relative movement, or micromotion.
Movement shortly after implantation prevents the formation of
bone and encourages the formation of fibrous connective tissue around the implant surface. This collagen-rich connective
tissue is known to be of lower modulus and strength. This is
the reason that a delay of months for intraoral restoration has
been recommended before loading after surgery. As mentioned
previously, success has been reported with immediate loading
of implants, depending on bone quality, patient selection, and
short-term control of intraoral function. The key issue is control of implant-to-tissue micromotion during the initial healing
of bone.
Numerous studies have defined the relationships for the
response of bone to the types of biomechanical stresses and
strains and their magnitudes. The results have been summarized
as the “frost paradigm,” where microstrain magnitudes are correlated with bone conditions of disuse atrophy (<500 με), normal function (500 to 1500 με), and microtrauma (more than
500 με). This concept is depicted schematically in Figure 12-17.
This paradigm affords opportunities to evaluate implant and
construct designs on a relative basis using finite-element models and analyses (FEM/FEA). Once again, this literature is well
developed.
Two main types of loading conditions can occur at an implant
site. These are represented by axial forces and bending moments
caused by noncentric loading conditions. A bending moment
can best be demonstrated by visualizing a cantilever beam design
in which the maximum bending moment is located at the fixed
base of support and is calculated as force (perpendicular to the
beam) times the length of the lever arm. These bending moments
become highly significant depending on the type and design of
implant restoration planned.
Rangert (1989), Skalak (1983), and Brunski (1988) analyzed
the theoretical effects of cantilever length, number of implants,
arrangement of implants, and prosthesis design. Their models were
based on the initial Brånemark hybrid prosthesis for the atrophic
mandible (Figure 12-18). This type of restoration usually involves

x 103)

4

Microstrain (

What are the important considerations for intraoral prosthesis design and
material?

3

Increased mass/altered geometry

2
Functional stability
1
Decreased mass/altered geometry
0
In vivo response of bone

• Figure 12-17 Schematic diagram of Frost paradigm.

four to six implants confined to the area between the mental foramen of the mandible, with cantilevers extending from the most
distal implant. These were restored with acrylic resin and denture
teeth, which were attached to a metallic superstructure by the
use of several types of attachment methods. The most significant
aspect of these studies is the optimal ratio of the cantilever length
to the interfixture distance.
When two or more implants are placed in a straight line,
the bending moment will be distributed proportionately to the
implants, provided that the intraoral prosthesis is designed to be
sufficiently rigid. Placement of the implants in an offset manner
has been suggested for more favorable positioning because it
redistributes the implant loading. However, some recent studies
have shown that tripodization of implants does not necessarily
minimize stresses as much as the use of wider-diameter implants
placed in a straight line. An increase in the anteroposterior
placement of implants is also recommended to minimize the
off-axis loading of the implant components. The load is greatest
at the most distal implant when an anteriorly positioned cantilever prosthesis exists. Thus the distance between the most terminal abutment and the one adjacent to it should be increased
to reduce the stress and strain induced within the most distal
abutment.
Another important factor to consider is the fit of the prosthesis
on the implant. An inaccurate fit will lead to a nonuniform distribution of load, with the unit closest to the load bearing most
of the forces. For well-integrated implants, the weakest link in the
early systems of Brånemark was the gold screw (also known as the
abutment screw), which is regarded as the safety feature for these
restorations. The external loads were transferred through the gold
screw if an inaccurate fit or overload existed, and the screw would
deform and fracture. These screws were fairly retrievable and were
easy to replace. The ultimate tensile strength of the gold screw was
designed to function within the normal ranges of occlusal force in
the molar region.
Some guidelines include computing the anteroposterior span
of all the implants and allowing a distance of 1.5 times any cantilever distance while limiting the maxilla to a maximal cantilever
of 8 mm because of the limitations of bone quality. Any cantilever length over 7 mm causes a significant increase in microstrain
within both the framework and bone. Therefore for any length

270

PA RT I I I

Indirect Restorative Materials

A

B

over 7 mm, ideal functional conditions should be considered,
or the decision to proceed under less ideal conditions should be
approached with extreme caution.
Another area of debate is the attachment of implants to natural teeth. The consensus seems to be that attaching implant
intraoral prostheses to natural teeth should be limited and that
having lone implants is a better restorative option. However,
in cases using natural teeth in the restoration (e.g., when a low
maxillary sinus position is present), there is disagreement as
to whether or not this decreases the survival probability of the
entire restoration. This issue stems from the different nature of
attachments to bone between the implant and the tooth. The
implant is integrated with bone (rigid), meaning that it has
a direct connection with bone. On the other hand, a tooth is
attached to bone through the periodontal ligament, which provides sensory functions to the tooth and also deforms in response
to masticatory loads. Numerous reports have focused on these
types of reconstructions; however, they should be approached
with caution. Bone formation or resorption is determined by the
tension or compression within the periodontal ligament. A concern associated with the attachment of an implant to a natural
tooth is that the mobility of the tooth might minimize its loadsharing ability and overload the implant, understimulate the
tooth, or cause a breakdown of the intraoral prosthesis. Several
devices, such as the IMZ intramobile element, have been developed to allow the implant to accommodate the movement of
the periodontal ligament. In any event, studies will continue to
elucidate the effects of implant and natural tooth attachment on
the probability of success. The results from most of the previous
studies suggest that the attachment of natural teeth to implants
does not compromise the prognosis of the prosthesis. Because
these studies also confirm the overall excellent success rates of
implant-supported prostheses, it is still recommended that this
be the first approach for treatment.

Summary

C
• Figure 12-18 A, The original Brånemark hybrid prosthesis designed
to accommodate severely atrophic mandibles. B, The hybrid prosthesis
usually uses four to six implants. C, Corresponding superstructure that is
screwed to the implants.

Selected Readings
Albrektsson T, Zarb G, Worthington P, et al: The long-term efficacy of
currently used dental implants: A review and proposed criteria of success, Int J Oral Max Impl 1:11–25, 1986.
Brånemark PI, Zarb GA, Albrektsson T: Tissue Integrated Prosthesis:
Osseointegration in Clinical Dentistry, Chicago, 1987, Quintessence.

The implant systems currently available are diverse. In 2020, there
were hundreds of companies manufacturing many different systems. The implant biomaterials, for the most part, range from
CPTi and titanium alloys to HA-coated devices. Manufacturers
have developed individualized designs for their implants, which
are now mostly root forms, and they are continually altering marketing strategies to highlight the features of each. Although most
of the implant materials described in this chapter are believed to
be biocompatible, the precise bone-bonding mechanisms are not
fully characterized on a molecular level. When the mechanisms
that ensure implant bioacceptance and structural stabilization are
more fully understood, implant failures will become less, provided
that implants are used properly and placed in sites for which they
are indicated.

Lee JJ, Rouhfar, Beirne OR: Survival of hydroxyapatite-coated
implants: A meta-analytic review, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 58:1372–
1379, 2000.
Meffert RM: Ceramic-coated implant systems, Adv Dent Res 13:170–
172, 1999.
Misch CM, Perel ML, Wang HL, et al: Implant success, survival and failure: The International Congress of Oral Implantologists (ICOI) Pisa
Consensus Conference, Implant Dent 17:5–15, 2008.

CHAPTER 12

Renvert S, Persson GR, Pirih FQ, et al: Peri-implant health, peri-implant
mucositis, and peri-implantitis: Case definitions and diagnostic considerations, J Clin Periodontol 45(S20):S278–S285, 2018.
Schnitman PA, Shulman LB (editors): Dental Implants: Benefits and
Risk, An NIH-Harvard Consensus Development Conference,
Washington, DC, 1979, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, pp 1–135.
Skalak R: Biomechanical considerations in osseointegrated prostheses,
J Prosthet Dent 49:843–849, 1983.

Dental Implants

271

The Academy of Prosthodontics: Glossary of Prosthodontic Terms:
9th ed, J Prosthet Dent 117(5S):e1–e105, 2017.
von SteyernVutl P, Kokubo Y, Nilner K: Use of abutment-teeth vs. dental implants to support all-ceramic fixed partial dentures: An in-vitro
study on fracture strength, Swed Dent J 29:53–60, 2005.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Akagi K, Okamoto Y, Matsuura T, et al: Properties of test metal ceramic
titanium alloys, J Prosthet Dent 68:462–467, 1992.
Akca K, Iplikcioglu H: Finite element stress analysis of the influence of
staggered versus straight placement of dental implants, Int J Oral Max
Impl 16:722–730, 2001.
Albrektsson T, Brånemark PI, Hansson HA, et al: Osseointegrated titanium implants. Requirements for ensuring a long-lasting, direct boneto-implant anchorage in man, Acta Orthop Scand 52:155–170, 1981.
Albrektsson T, Sennerby L: State of the art in oral implants, J Clin Periodontol 18:474–481, 1991.
Albrektsson T, Zarb G, Worthington P, et al: The long-term efficacy of
currently used dental implants: A review and proposed criteria of
success, Int J Oral Max Impl 1:11–25, 1986.
ASTM F 67-00: Standard specification for unalloyed titanium, for surgical implant applications (UNS R 50250, UNS R 50400, UNS R
50550, UNS R 50700). In Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Philadelphia, 2000, American Society for Testing and Materials.
ASTM F 136-98: Wrought titanium–6 aluminum–4 vanadium ELI
(extra low interstitial) alloy (UNS R 56401) for surgical implant
applications. In Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Philadelphia,
2000, American Society for Testing Materials.
ASTM F 139-00: Standard specification for wrought 18 chromium–14
nickel–2.5 molybdenum stainless steel bar and wire for surgical
implants (UNS S 31673). In Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Philadelphia, 2000, American Society for Testing Materials.
Ataya A, Kline KP, Cope J, et al: Titanium exposure and yellow nail syndrome, Respir Med Case Rep 16:146–147, 2015.
Balkin B: Implant Dentistry: Historical overview with current perspective, J Dent Educ 52:683–695, 1988.
Baltag I, Watanabe K, Kusakari H, et al: Long-term changes of hydroxyapatite-coated dental implants, J Biomed Mater Res 53:76–85, 2000.
Berglund F, Carlmark B: Titanium, sinusitis, and the yellow nail syndrome, Biol Trace Elem Res 143:1–7, 2011.
Berman N: Implant technique for full lower denture, Wash Dent J 19:15–
17, 1950.
Bosker H, van Dijk L: The transmandibular implant, Ned Tijdschr Tandheelkd 90:381–389, 1983.
Bosker H, van Dijk L: The transmandibular implant: a 12-year-follow-up
study, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 47:442–450, 1989.
Brånemark PI, Zarb GA, Albrektsson T: Tissue Integrated Prosthesis:
Osseointegration in Clinical Dentistry, Chicago, 1987, Quintessence.
Brunski JB: Biomechanics of oral implants: Future research directions,
J Dent Educ 52:775–787, 1988.
Brunski JB, Skalak R: Biomechanical considerations in advanced osseointegration surgery: Applications in the maxillofacial region. In
Worthington P, Brånemark PI (editors): Biomechanical Considerations
in Advanced Osseointegration Surgery: Applications in the Maxillofacial
Region, Carol Stream, IL, 1992, Quintessence, pp 15–40.
Chang YL, Lew D, Park JB, et al: Biomechanical and morphometric
analysis of hydroxyapatite-coated implants with varying crystallinity,
J Oral Maxillofac Surg 57:1096–1109, 1999.
Chuang SK, Wei LJ, Douglass CW, et al: Risk factors for dental implant
failure: A strategy for the analysis of clustered failure-time observations, J Dent Res 81:572–577, 2002.
Cochran D, Fritz M: Implant therapy I and II, Annals of Perio 1:707–
821, 1996.
Craig RG, editor: Restorative Dental Materials, ed 11, St. Louis, 2001,
Mosby.
Davies JE: Mechanisms of endosseous integration, Int J Prosthodont
11:391–401, 1998.
Driskell TD: History of implants, Calif Dent Assoc J 15:16–25, 1987.
Fiorellini JP, Chen PK, Nevins M, et al: A retrospective study of dental
implants in diabetic patients, Int J Periodont Rest 20:366–373, 2000.
Gottlander M, Albrektsson T: Histomorphometric studies of hydroxylapatite-coated and uncoated CP titanium threaded implants in bone, Int
J Oral Max Impl 6:399–404, 1991.

Grandi T, Garuti G, Guazzi P, et al: Survival and success rates of immediately and early loaded implants: 12-month results from a multicentric
randomized clinical study, J Oral Implantol 38:239–249, 2012.
Greenfield EJ: Implantation of artificial crown and bridge abutments,
Dent Cosmos 55:364–369, 1913.
Ichikawa T, Hanawa T, Ukai H, et al: Three-dimensional bone response
to commercially pure titanium, hydroxyapatite, and calcium-ionmissing titanium in rabbits, Int J Oral Max Impl 15:231–238, 2000.
Kasemo B, Lausmaa J: The biomaterial-tissue interface and its analogues in
surface science and technology editor. In Davis JE (editor): The BoneBiomaterials Interface, Toronto, 1991, University of Toronto, pp 19–32.
Lacefield WR: Materials characteristics for uncoated/ceramic-coated
implant materials, Adv Dent Res 13:21–26, 1999.
Lautenschlager EP, Monaghan P: Titanium and titanium alloys as dental
materials, Int Dent J 43:245–253, 1993.
Lee JJ, Rouhfar, Beirne OR: Survival of hydroxyapatite-coated
implants: A meta-analytic review, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 58:1372–
1379, 2000.
Lindh T, Back T, Nystromm E, et al: Implant versus tooth-implant supported prosthesis in the posterior maxilla: A 2-year report, Clin Oral
Implants Res 12:441–449, 2001.
Linkow LI: The bladevent – a new dimension in endosseous implants,
Dent Concepts 11:3–18, 1968.
McCracken M: Dental implant material: Commercially pure titanium
and titanium alloys, J Prosthodont 8:40–43, 1999.
Meffert RM: Ceramic-coated implant systems, Adv Dent Res 13:170–
172, 1999.
Misch CM, Ismail YH: Finite element stress analysis of tooth-to-implant
fixed partial denture designs, J Prosthodont 2:83–92, 1993.
Misch CM, Perel ML, Wang HL, et al: Implant success, survival
and failure: The International Congress of Oral Implantologists
(ICOI) Pisa Consensus Conference, Implant Dent 17:5–15, 2008.
Natiella JR, Armitage JE, Greene Jr GW, et al: Current evaluations of
dental implants, J Am Dent Assoc 84:1358, 1972.
Ogiso M, Yamashita Y, Matsumoto T: Differences in microstructural
characteristics of dense HA and HA coating, J Biomed Mater Res
41:296–303, 1998.
Parr GR, Gardner LK, Toth RW: Titanium: The mystery metal of implant
dentistry. Dental materials aspect, J Prosthet Dent 54:410–414, 1985.
Rangert B, Gunne J, Sullivan DY: Mechanical aspects of a Brånemark
implant connected to a natural tooth: An in vitro study, Int J Oral
Max Impl 6:177–186, 1991.
Rangert B, Jemt T, Jörneus L: Forces and moments on Branemark
implants, Int J Oral Max Impl 4:241–247, 1989.
Renvert S, Persson GR, Pirih FQ, et al: Peri-implant health, peri-implant
mucositis, and peri-implantitis: Case definitions and diagnostic considerations, J Clin Periodontol 45(S20):S278–S285, 2018.
Renvert S, Polyzois IN: Clinical approaches to treat peri-implant mucositis and peri-implantitis, Periodontol 2000 68:369–404, 2015.
Roberts HD, Roberts RA: The ramus endosseous implant, Oral Implantol
1:104–116, 1970.
Rodriguez AM, Aquilino SA, Lund PS, et al: Evaluation of strain at the
terminal abutment site of a fixed mandibular implant prosthesis during cantilever loading, J Prosthodont 2:93–102, 1993.
Schnitman PA: Implant dentistry: Where are we now? J Am Dent Assoc
124:39–47, 1993.
Schnitman PA, Shulman LB. Dental Implants: Benefits and Risk, An NIHHarvard Consensus Development Conference, Washington, DC, 1979,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, pp 1–135.
Schnitman PA, Wohrle PS, Rubenstein JE: Immediate fixed interim prostheses supported by two-stage threaded implants: methodology and
results, J Oral Implantol 16:96–105, 1990.
Skalak R: Biomechanical considerations in osseointegrated prostheses, J Prosthet Dent 49:843–849, 1983.
Small IA, Chalmers J: Lyons Memorial Lecture: Metal implants and the
mandibular staple bone plate, J Oral Surg 33:571–585, 1975.
Smith D: Dental implants: Materials and design considerations, Int J
Prosthodont 6:106–117, 1993.
272.e1

Sohn BS, Heo SJ, Koak JY, et al: Strain of implants depending on occlusion types in mandibular implant-supported fixed prostheses, J Adv
Prosthodont 3:1–9, 2011.
Steflik DE, Corpe RS, Young TR, et al: The biologic tissue responses to
uncoated and coated implanted biomaterials, Adv Dent Res 13:27–33,
1999.
The Academy of Prosthodontics: Glossary of prosthodontic terms,
9th ed. J Prosthet Dent 117(5S):e1–e105, 2017.
Tonetti MS: Determination of the success and failure of root-form osseointegrated dental implants, Adv Dent Res 13:173–180, 1999.

272.e2

Venable CS, Stuck WG, Beach A: Effects on bone of the presence of metals: based on electrolysis, Ann Surg 105:917–938, 1937.
von SteyernVutl P, Kokubo Y, Nilner K: Use of abutment-teeth vs.
dental implants to support all-ceramic fixed partial dentures:
an in-vitro study on fracture strength, Swed Dent J 29:53–60,
2005.
Wang B, Ruan W, Liu J, et al: Microstructure, mechanical properties and
preliminary biocompatibility evaluation of binary Ti-Zr alloys for
dental application, J Biomater Appl 33:766–775, 2019.

Part IV

Fabrication of Prostheses
13 Auxiliary Materials, 275
14 Casting Investments and Casting Procedures, 306
15 Digital Technology in Dentistry, 326
16 Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and
Polishing, 332

273

13

Auxiliary Materials
OUTLINE
Classification of Impression Materials

Inelastic Impression Materials

Elastomeric Impression Materials

Gypsum Products

Hydrocolloids

Dental Waxes

KEY TERMS
IMPRESSION MATERIALS
Base paste (base putty) The component that forms the main
three-dimensional structure of a final impression.
Catalyst paste (catalyst putty) A component of a polymerization
reaction that decreases the energy required for the reaction and
usually does not become part of the final product; however, the
term catalyst has been used for the structural component of
dental materials that initiates the polymerization reaction.
Colloid A solid, liquid, or gaseous substance made up of large molecules or masses of smaller molecules that remain in suspension
in a surrounding continuous medium of different matter.
Elastomer Any of various polymers having the elastic properties
of natural rubber.
Gel A network of fibrils forming a weak, slightly elastic brush-heap
structure of hydrocolloid; also, the solid network structure of a
crosslinked polymer.
Gelation The process of transforming a hydrocolloid from a sol to
a gel.
Imbibition The displacement of one fluid by another immiscible
fluid in a hydrocolloid. In the context of impression materials,
imbibition is the uptake by agar or alginate when immersed in
water.
Inelastic Incapable of sustaining significant elastic deformation
without fracturing under stress.
Model A positive full-scale replica of teeth, soft tissues, and
restored structures used as a diagnostic aid for the construction
of orthodontic and prosthetic appliances; a facsimile used for
display purposes.
Pseudoplastic A non-Newtonian behavior of fluids whose
viscosity decreases under shear strain until it reaches a nearly
constant value. Thus, the more rapidly pseudoplastic fluids are
stirred or forced through a syringe, the less viscous (thinner) and
more easily they flow.
Shear thinning The tendency for viscosity to decrease as the
shearing rate increases (see pseudoplastic and thixotropy).
Static mixing A technique of transforming two paste-like materials (or fluids) into a homogeneous mixture without mechanical
stirring; two streams of material are forced into a mixer cylinder,
and the stationary elements in the mixer divide and recombine
the feed materials and keep the material streams spiraling
through the cylinder simultaneously.

Syneresis The expression of fluid onto the surface of gel structures.
Thixotropy The property of certain gels or fluids to become less
viscous when sufficient energy in the form of impact force or
vibration is applied; at rest, they require a specific duration
to return to the previous viscous state. Both pseudoplasticity
and thixotropy are shear-thinning processes; the difference is
that changes in pseudoplastic viscosity do not exhibit the time
dependency characteristic of thixotropy.
Viscoelastic/viscoelasticity The ability of a material to strain
instantaneously like an elastic solid during rapid stretching or
to resist shear flow and to strain linearly over time (like honey)
when a stress is applied continuously.

GYPSUM PRODUCTS
Dental plaster (plaster of Paris) The beta form of calcium sulfate
hemihydrate (CaSO4• ½H2O).
Dental stone The alpha form of calcium sulfate hemihydrate
(CaSO4• ½H2O).
Hygroscopic setting expansion The expansion that occurs when
gypsum or a gypsum-bonded investment sets while immersed
in water (usually heated to approximately 38 °C [100 °F]).
Normal setting expansion The expansion that occurs when gypsum or a gypsum-bonded investment sets in ambient air.

WAXES
Baseplate wax Dental wax provided in sheet form to establish the
initial arch form in the construction of complete dentures.
Bite wax A wax form used to record the occlusal surfaces of teeth
as an aid in establishing maxillo-mandibular relationships.
Boxing wax A wax sheet form used as a border at the perimeter of
an impression to provide an enclosed boundary for the base of the
cast to be made from a poured material such as gypsum or resin.
Corrective wax (dental impression wax) A thermoplastic wax
that is used to make a type of dental impression.
Dental wax (1) A low-molecular-weight ester of fatty acids derived
from natural or synthetic components, such as petroleum
derivatives, that soften to a plastic state at a relatively low temperature. (2) A mixture of two or more waxes and additives used
as an aid for the production of gypsum casts, the production of
nonmetallic denture bases, the registering of jaw relations, and
laboratory work.
275

276

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Flow Relative ability of wax to plastically deform when heated
slightly above body temperature.
Inlay wax A specialized dental wax that can be applied to dies
to form direct or indirect patterns for the lost wax technique,
which is used for the casting of metals or hot pressing of
ceramics.

Refractory Capable of sustaining exposure to a high temperature
without significant degradation.
Sprue The mold channel through which molten metal or ceramic
flows into a mold cavity.
Sticky wax A type of dental wax that exhibits high adhesion to
dry, clean surfaces when heated to a plastic condition.

Prosthetic devices and restorations are made to adapt to the
anatomy of the oral tissue receiving the device. If the device is
to be fabricated by the lost wax technique, a pattern with the
exact dimensions of the device must be made with a material
that is stable at room temperature but that can be removed by
melting or burning out. The pattern usually is made of wax.
To ensure close adaptation or fit for cementation of the fabricated device, the pattern must be fabricated on a model or die.
A model (cast) or die can be made from gypsum products using
an impression mold (or negative likeness) of a dental structure
(Figure 13-1). Gypsum is a powder that, when mixed with water,
becomes flowable and capable of being poured into an impression mold and capturing and reproducing the fine detail of the
impression. Gypsum models are dimensionally stable during the
entire process of pattern making and are resistant to scratching during pattern fabrication. To duplicate the anatomical form
of the oral tissue, an impression material that is initially moldable is forced against the tissue and then sets. After removal, the
impression should remain stable while models or dies are being
made. These materials are required for making prostheses but do
not become part of a final prosthesis. They are thus known as
auxiliary materials. Impression materials, gypsum products, and
waxes have multiple applications in addition to making prostheses. This chapter focuses on the use and relevant properties for
general applications.

Classification of Impression Materials

CRITICAL QUESTION
How are dental impression materials classified?

To produce accurate replicas of intra- and extraoral tissues, the
impression materials should be (1) sufficiently fluid to adapt to
the oral tissues, (2) viscous enough to be contained in a tray, (3)
able to transform (set) into a rubbery or rigid solid in the mouth in
a reasonable time (<7 minutes), (4) resistant to distortion or tearing when removed from the mouth, (5) dimensionally stable long
enough to allow one or more casts to be poured, (6) biocompatible,
and (7) cost-effective in terms of the required processing time and
the expense of the materials and associated processing equipment.
By their composition, the impression materials are divided into
three major groups: nonaqueous elastomers, hydrocolloids, and
inelastic materials. Elastomers include polysulfide, condensation
and addition silicone, and polyether. Hydrocolloids are alginate
and agar. Inelastic materials comprise impression compound, plaster of Paris, and zinc oxide–eugenol (ZOE).
They are also classified by mechanism of setting, mechanical properties, and clinical applications. The setting mechanisms of impression
materials can be reversible and irreversible. Reversible materials, such
as agar and impression compound, soften upon heating and retain
the shape when cooled in the oral cavity, with no chemical changes
taking place. Irreversible materials imply that chemical reactions have
occurred during impression making. The set impression materials can
be inelastic (rigid) or elastic. Set rigid materials are highly resistant to
flexure but fracture when deformed. They include ZOE impression
paste, impression plaster, and impression compound. The term elastic
in impression materials means that the material can be flexed easily without fracture and returns to its original form when unstressed.
Hydrocolloids and elastomers fall into this category. The ability of
elastic impression materials to rebound after removal from the mouth
makes them suitable for reproducing both the hard and soft structures of the mouth, including the undercuts and interproximal spaces.
Inelastic impression materials, such as ZOE and plaster, are ideal for
making impressions of edentulous jaw structures or soft tissue because
they do not compress the tissue during seating of the impression tray.
Impression compound is often used to make trays for the construction of full dentures. Table 13-1 shows the classification based on the
setting mechanism and mechanical characteristics.
Environmental conditions and the type of tissue dictate the
choice of materials, the quality of the impression, and the quality
of the cast. The next three sections discuss the unique properties
of three categories of impression materials by composition and
describe how they affect the quality of the impressions and the casts.

Elastomeric Impression Materials

• Figure 13-1 Impressions of dentate (left) and edentulous arches (right)
with the resulting respective gypsum casts.

Elastomeric impression materials are crosslinked polymers when
set that can be stretched and yet rapidly recover to their original
dimensions when stress is released. Chemically, there are three elastomers based on polysulfide, silicone (polysiloxane), and polyether.
A background covering the underlying fundamentals of polymeric
materials is presented in Chapter 2, Polymers.

TABLE 13-1

Classification of Dental Impression
Materials

HS

SH

CHAPTER 13

Auxiliary Materials

HS

SH

SH

HS

277

SH
SH

SH

MECHANICAL CHARACTERISTICS
SH

SH

Setting Mechanism

Inelastic

Elastic

Chemical reaction
(irreversible)

Plaster of Paris
Zinc oxide–eugenol

Alginate
Polysulfide
Polyether
Condensation silicone
Addition silicone

SH

Thermally induced
physical reaction
(reversible)

Impression
compound

Agar

Pb O2

SH

Elastomeric impression materials are supplied in two components,
a base and a catalyst (or accelerator), that are mixed before making impressions. The term catalyst or accelerator used here may be
a misnomer with certain material systems. Reactor is a more appropriate term for the polysulfide and condensation silicone because
they participate in the reaction. In the case of polyether, the catalyst
contains initiators. The materials are often formulated in several
consistencies, including extra low, low, medium, heavy, and putty,
in increasing order of filler content. Extra-low and putty forms are
available only for condensation and addition silicones. Polysulfide
is provided only in light-body and heavy-body consistencies. Pigments are added to give each material a distinct color. As a group
of impression materials, elastomers are classified by consistency
measured immediately after complete mixing as type 0: putty, type
1: heavy-bodied, type 2: medium-bodied, and type 3: light-bodied
(International Organization of Standard ISO 4823:2015).

Polysulfide
The base paste contains a liquid prepolymer with multifunctional mercaptan (–SH) groups, a suitable filler to provide the
consistency for mixing and the required strength when set, a plasticizer to confer the appropriate viscosity for workability of the
paste, and a small quantity of sulfur (~0.5%) to accelerate the
reaction. The catalyst paste contains lead dioxide, filler, and plasticizer, as in the base paste, and oleic or stearic acid as a retarder to
control the rate of the setting reaction. Each paste is supplied in a
dispensing tube with appropriately sized bore diameters at the tip
so that equal lengths of each paste are extruded from each tube to
provide the correct ratio of base to crosslinking agent.
The reaction starts as soon as mixing begins, and a resilient
network has started to form (Figure 13-2). During the final set, a
material of adequate elasticity and strength is formed so that the
impression can be removed past undercuts quite readily. Elevated
temperature and humid conditions will accelerate the setting of
polysulfide impression material. The reaction yields water as a byproduct. Loss of water from the set material has a significant effect
on the dimensional stability of the impression.
Condensation Silicone
The materials are supplied as a base paste and a liquid catalyst, a
two-paste system, or a two-putty system. The putty can be used
as the tray material in conjunction with a low-viscosity silicone,
which is referred to as the putty-wash technique.
The base paste consists of α-ω-hydroxyl-terminated polydimethyl siloxane (Figure 13-3). The curing of this material

Pb O + O

S S

HS

Chemistry of Elastomeric Impression Materials

HS

SH

S

S S
SH

S

S

S
SH

SH

SH

HS
SH

+ H2O

• Figure 13-2 Polymerization of polysulfide impression material. SH groups
interact with oxygen released from lead dioxide (left). Completion of the condensation reaction results in water as a by-product (right). Pendant −SH is
for crosslinking, and terminal −SH is for chain lengthening of the polymer.
involves a reaction of tri- and tetra-functional alkyl silicates in
the presence of stannous octoate as a catalyst. The material sets
by condensation reaction between terminal groups of the silicone
polymers and the alkyl silicate to form a three-dimensional network (Figure 13-3). Ethyl alcohol is a by-product of the condensation reaction that evaporates, and the evaporation accounts for
much of the contraction that occurs during setting.

Addition Silicone
This material is often called a polyvinyl siloxane (PVS) or vinyl
polysiloxane (VPS) impression material. The base paste contains
polymethylhydrosiloxane and other siloxane prepolymers. The
catalyst paste contains divinylpolysiloxane and a platinum salt.
Both pastes contain fillers. The addition silicone is based on addition polymerization between divinylpolysiloxane and polymethylhydrosiloxane with a platinum salt as the catalyst (Figure 13-4).
No reaction by-products are formed if the correct proportions
of base and catalyst pastes are used and there are no impurities.
However, the residual polymethylhydrosiloxane in the material
can lead to a secondary reaction with each other or with moisture,
producing hydrogen gas. Technically, hydrogen gas is a reaction
by-product that does not affect the dimensional stability of the
impression. Nonetheless, the hydrogen gas evolved can result in
pinpoint voids in the gypsum casts poured soon after the removal
of the impression from the mouth. A noble metal, such as palladium, can be added as a scavenger for the released hydrogen
gas. The impression should be left overnight if epoxy is used for
pouring models.
Sulfur contamination from natural latex gloves inhibits the setting of addition silicone. Some vinyl gloves may have the same effect
because of the sulfur-containing stabilizer used in the manufacturing
process. The contamination is so pervasive that touching the tooth
with latex gloves before seating the impression can inhibit the setting
of the critical surface next to the tooth.

278

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

• Figure 13-3 Condensation polymerization of α-ω-hydroxy-terminated poly (dimethyl siloxane) with tetraethyl orthosilicate in the presence of stannous octoate (catalyst). The reaction results in the release of
ethanol molecules.

• Figure 13-4 Polymerization of addition silicone. Hydrogen atoms along the backbone structure of the
vinyl silicone chain move to the vinyl groups during addition polymerization (top). Final structure after the
platinum salt has initiated the addition polymerization reaction (bottom). The zigzag line at the other end of
divinylpolysiloxane represents repeating units of dimethylsiloxane with a vinyl terminal.

Medium-body addition silicone has also been formulated for
making impressions for diagnostic purposes, as a substitute for
alginate impression material, an irreversible hydrocolloid to be
discussed later. The advantage of these so-called alginate substitutes
is the ability to make multiple, accurate diagnostic casts from one
impression. Laboratory studies have reported that they exhibited
better detail reproduction and less variability in linear dimensional
change than alginates.

Polyether
There are two types of polyether impression materials. The first is
based on the ring-opening polymerization of aziridine rings, which
are at the end of branched polyether molecules (Figure 13-5). The
main chain is probably a copolymer of ethylene oxide and tetrahydrofuran. Crosslinking and setting are promoted by an initiator and
an aromatic sulfonate ester, where R is an alkyl group. This produces
crosslinking by cationic polymerization via the imine end groups. The
base paste contains the polyether prepolymer, colloidal silica as filler,
and a plasticizer such as glycol ether or phthalate. The accelerator paste
contains an alkyl-aromatic sulfonate in addition to the filler and plas-

ticizer. The ether-dominated polymer backbones make this group of
materials the most hydrophilic of all elastomeric impression materials.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the steps needed to produce casts and dies for prosthetic procedures?

The second type is based on an acid-catalyzed condensation polymerization (Figure 13-3) of polyether prepolymer with alkoxysilane terminal groups. The mechanism is like that observed in condensation
silicones having low-molecular-weight alcohols as by-products. This
material is often called a hybrid. Because the ether linkages constitute
the main component of the polymer chains, these materials behave
very much like the first type of polyether impression material.

Making Impressions With Elastomeric Materials
The use of elastomeric impression material to fabricate gypsum
models, casts, and dies involves six major steps: (1) preparing a
tray, (2) managing tissue, (3) preparing the material, (4) making

CHAPTER 13

Auxiliary Materials

279

• Figure 13-5 Ring-opening polymerization of polyether. The initiator, aromatic sulfonate ester, dissociates
(top) and forms alkyl cations that bind the nitrogen atoms of the aziridine ring terminals of the prepolymer
(left). The arrows indicate binding between the cations (R+) with the nitrogen atoms. This action opens the
ring, and the reacted prepolymer (center) now has two charged ethylene imine terminals (–NR–CH2–C+H2),
which can react with the nitrogen atoms of adjacent unreacted prepolymers, shown as the R2-aziridine
ring. This chain-propagation polymerization reaction yields a larger molecule (right), which continues growing by binding with the aziridine rings of additional unreacted prepolymers. The polymerization reaction
terminates when the growing chain combines with a counterion.

an impression, (5) removing the impression, and (6) preparing for
stone casts and dies.

Impression Trays
The use of a custom tray (Figure 13-6, left) requires less impression
material than a stock tray to make impressions, thus minimizing
dimensional changes attributable to the materials. A custom tray
allows a uniform distribution of impression material between the
tray and the tissue, which also improves accuracy. This is especially true for polysulfide impression material. The use of custom
trays for polyether and addition silicone impressions is not critical because these materials are stiffer and have less polymerization shrinkage than polysulfide. In addition, disposable stock
trays (Figure 13-6, right) work satisfactorily. Note that the use of
less material in a custom tray reduces the compressibility of the

• Figure 13-6 Impression trays. Custom tray (left) and stock tray (right).

280

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

impression, which can make removal of the impression tray more
difficult. When severe undercuts are present, the use of a custom
tray should be avoided. The stock tray should be rigid, thereby
minimizing flexure of the tray during impression removal. Prior
to making an impression, a uniform thickness of tray adhesive is
applied on the tray surface, extending over its edge, and allowed
to dry (through evaporation of solvent). Tray adhesives are not
interchangeable among different types of materials.

Tissue Management
The margins of tooth preparations for fixed prostheses often extend
to or below the free margin of the gingiva. To ensure access for the
tooth preparation and for making the impression, displacing the
gingival tissues is necessary to control gingival hemorrhage and
sulcular fluids from distorting the margins of the crown preparation. Among the most popular methods of gingival displacement
is the use of gingival retraction cord. An electrosurgical unit or a
soft tissue laser can also be used.
Placing a retraction cord displaces the gingival tissue laterally
away from the margin of the preparation. One or two gingival
retraction cords are placed under the margin around the tooth for
at least 5 minutes before making impressions. The double-cord
technique is used when the margin is very close to the gingival
attachment. A fine cord is placed at the base of the crevice to

facilitate moisture control, with a larger cord placed on top of the
first and near the coronal extent to displace the gingiva laterally.
The outermost cord is removed, leaving the fine cord within the
crevice while the impression is made. A single cord is sufficient
to deflect the soft tissue around the margin when the preparation
margin is at or slightly above the gingival crest.
Retraction cords may be impregnated with a hemostatic agent
by dipping the cord in a hemostatic solution prior to placement.
These agents can have unintended side effects and should be used
with caution. For example, epinephrine, which is used widely, is
of concern in patients with cardiovascular disease. In addition,
agents with a low pH can remove the smear layer and superficial
dentin apical to the margins of the preparation, possibly leading
to postoperative sensitivity of some teeth.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does static mixing achieve a uniform mixture? What is the main
difference between static mixing and dynamic mixing?

Manipulation of Impression Materials
Currently, elastomeric impression materials are offered for three
modes of mixing: hand mixing, static mixing, and dynamic
mechanical mixing (Figure 13-7).

• Figure 13-7 Mixing systems. A, Hand mixing. Two equal lengths of the material are dispensed on the
mixing pad with the mixing spatula. B, Static mixing. When the trigger is pulled, the plunger is driven
forward (to the left) so that the base and catalyst pastes are forced from the cartridge into the mixing tip
(extreme left). The pastes pass through the bore and exit the nozzle as a uniform mixed paste. Four different sizes of mixing tips are shown; the more viscous the material, the larger is the mixing tip that should
be used. Syringe tips can be fit to the nozzle to deliver the mixed paste directly to the prepared teeth.
C, Static mixing syringe. These syringes fit the cartridge, such as the mixing tips shown in (B). The base
and catalyst are first injected into the respective barrel. A plunger then forces the material through a smaller
static mixing tip. It can deliver the light-body material directly onto the abutment(s). D, Dynamic mechanical
mixing. The motor-driving mechanism forces the material into the mixing tip and makes the impeller (insert)
inside the tip rotate. The function of the impeller is only to mix the material.

CHAPTER 13

Hand Mixing

The user dispenses the same lengths of materials onto a mixing pad
(Figure 13-7, A). The catalyst paste is first collected on a stainlesssteel spatula and then spread over the base paste. The mixture is
spread over the mixing pad. The mass is then scraped up with the
spatula blade and spread uniformly back and forth on the mixing
pad. This process continues until the mixed paste is uniform in
color, with no streaks of the base or catalyst appearing in the mixture. If one of the components is in liquid form, such as the catalyst
for condensation silicones, a length of the base is dispensed from the
tube onto a graduated mixing pad, and drops of the liquid catalyst
corresponding to the length of the base are added.
The two-putty systems available for condensation and addition
silicone are dispensed by volume using an equal number of scoops
of each material. The best mixing technique is to knead the material with one’s gloved fingers until a uniform color is obtained.
Static Mixing

This technique transforms two flowable (or paste-like) materials
into a homogeneous mixture without mechanical mixing. The
device comprises a gun for pushing materials in a two-cylinder cartridge (base and catalyst), along with a mixing tip (Figure 13-7, B).
The mixing tip is made of helical mixer elements in a cylindrical
housing (Figure 13-8). The mixer elements are a series of alternating right- and left-turn 180° helixes positioned so that the leading
edge of one element is perpendicular to the trailing edge of the
other one (Figure 13-8, B).
The base and catalyst are pressed from the cartridge into the mixing tip as one stream of a two-layer material. The leading edge of the
first element splits the material entering the mixer into two streams.
The streams that flow on either side of the helix will make a 180° turn
(Figure 13-8, A) when they reach the second element. Both streams
are split by the leading edge of the second element and become two
streams of four-layer material (two layers from each original stream)

A

Auxiliary Materials

281

entering the third element. This process is known as flow division.
Even if there is no intermixing between layers as they merge to a new
stream, there will be 2n layers in either stream as they come out of the
nth element. For a mixing tip with 11 elements, the stream that exits
the mixing tip will have a 2048-striation structure, which is practically
a uniformly mixed stream of material. In addition, as the materials
make turns along the helix, the rotational circulation causes a radial
mixing of the materials. Thus mixing between layers occurs before the
subsequent flow division that further increases the uniformity of the
mixture. Because there is no mechanical mixing, porosity caused by
mixing with air is avoided.
The mixed impression material is injected directly into the
adhesive-coated tray or, if the “syringe tip” is in place, onto the prepared teeth. One can also use an intraoral syringe (Figure 13-7, C) to
apply light-body material onto prepared teeth. One precaution that
should be taken is to make sure that the openings of the cartridges
that dispense the pastes remain unclogged. Problems can be avoided
if one expresses a small amount of material from the cartridge before
attaching the mixing tip and discards the first centimeter of mixture
that emerges from the mixing tip. This process is called bleeding. This
type of device has also been adapted to mix and dispense acrylicbased materials for fabricating temporary crown and bridge, and luting cements that are used for luting prostheses (Chapter 7, Clinical
Manipulation and Evaluation).
Dynamic Mechanical Mixing

The device shown in Figure 13-7, D uses a motor to drive parallel
plungers, forcing the materials into a mixing tip and out into an
impression tray or syringe; meanwhile, the motor-driven impeller, which is inside the mixing tip, mixes the materials as they are
extruded through the tip. The function of the impeller is only to mix
the materials as they are passing through; it does not propel the material. The materials are supplied in collapsible plastic bags housed in a
cartridge. The amount of material retained in the mixing tip is slightly
greater than that used in static mixing. In using this device, thorough
mixing of higher-viscosity materials can be achieved with little effort.
Both polyether and addition silicone impression materials of various
viscosities are available with this dispensing system.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does each impression-making technique take advantage of the unique
properties of the impression materials?

C

Techniques of Making Impressions
Elastomeric impression materials are typically supplied in several
viscosities to accommodate the different techniques for impression making. Three techniques for making impressions are discussed in this section.

• Figure 13-8 Design of a static mixing tip. A, Mechanism of mixing in

Multiple-Mix Technique

B

a two-element model. The two-element model shows that the materials
injected into a left-turn helix are immediately split into two streams. Both
streams make a 180° counterclockwise turn when they reach the leading
edge of the next element, a right-turn helix. Each stream is split as it enters
the new element. Two new streams, made of combining two substreams,
one from each original stream, now make a 180° clockwise turn when they
reach the trailing edge of the element. When there is a third element present,
each substream will be split again, and the total number of substreams will
be eight (23). B, Mixer elements with 11 helixes. The double-headed arrow
delineates the size of one element. The appearance of a size difference between neighboring elements is caused by the orientation. C, Mixing tip with
encased mixer elements. (Courtesy Dr. Karl-Johan Söderholm.)

A syringe material (light body) and a tray material (heavy body)
are used in this technique. When they are hand mixed, they are
mixed simultaneously, each by a different person because one must
load the syringe with the light-body material. With mechanical
devices, the materials can be mixed as needed by one individual.
The lighter material is dispensed from the filled syringe or directly
from a static mixing gun within and around the tooth preparation. The filled tray is then inserted in the mouth and seated over
the syringe material. The tray material will force the syringe material to adapt to the prepared tissues. The two materials should
bond together upon setting. If either material has progressed past

282

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Shorter,
narrower die

D
Force on partially
set material

Compression of
impression

Elastic
recovery

A

B

C

• Figure 13-9 Effect of seating-tray material that has passed its working time and developed some elasticity. A, Impression tray containing elastomeric impression material is seated too late as elasticity starts
to develop. B, Increased seating pressure is applied to overcome the stiffness of impression material. C,
Distortion develops during the recovery of excessive elastic deformation (springback). D, The die produced
in the inaccurate impression is too narrow and too short.

the working time when brought together, the bond between them
will be compromised. If a partially set material is seated, the material will be compressed elastically. Once removed from the mouth,
the impression will “spring back” or relax, and the dies made from
this impression will be too narrow and too short, as illustrated in
Figure 13-9.
In rare cases a clinician may attempt to repair an impression
that has small defects or that lacks sufficient detail. This is usually performed by cutting away the interproximal and gingival
areas of the impression. Reseating the tray precisely will be difficult even with proper relief of the initial impression. Entrapment of a minute fragment of impression material or debris
will eliminate any chance of a successful repair. The impression material’s surface must be roughened to ensure that the
new material bonds to the set impression. The safest method is
to make a new impression when bubbles or similar defects are
detected in critical areas.
Monophase Technique

Medium-body polyether and addition silicone are often used
for the monophase or single-viscosity technique. The procedure
is like that of the multiple-mix technique except that only one
mixture is made, and part of the material is placed in the tray,
and another portion is placed in the syringe for injection in the
cavity preparation, prepared teeth, or soft tissue. The success of
this technique depends on the pseudoplastic (shear-thinning)
properties of the materials. When a medium-viscosity material is forced through the syringe tip, the viscosity is reduced,
facilitating material adaptation to the preparation. Meanwhile,
the material in the tray retains a medium viscosity, and when
seated, the tray material can force the syringe material to flow
past critical areas of the tooth preparation. Table 13-2 shows the
effect of shear rate and elapsed time on some monophase addition silicones.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the consequences of placing an impression material in the mouth
after the working time has expired?

Putty-Wash Technique

The thick putty material is placed in a stock tray, and a preliminary
impression is made. This procedure results in what is essentially
an intraoral custom-made tray formed by the putty. Space for the
light-body “wash” material is provided either by cutting away some
of the “tray” putty or by using a thin polyethylene sheet as a spacer
between the putty and the prepared teeth during preliminary
impression making. A mixture of the thin-consistency wash material is placed into the putty impression and on the preparation;
then the tray is reseated in the mouth to make the final impression.

Removal of the Impression
Under no circumstances should the impression be removed
until the curing has progressed sufficiently to provide adequate
elasticity. One method for determining the time of removal is
to inject some of the syringe material onto a space that is not
in the field of operation before inserting the impression tray.
This material can be probed with a blunt instrument from time
to time; when the material is firm and returns completely to
the original contour, the impression is sufficiently elastic to be
removed. Typically, the impression should be ready for removal
within at least 10 minutes from the time of mixing, allowing 6
to 8 minutes for the impression to remain in the mouth. Manufacturers usually provide instructions as to the optimal time for
removal after mixing.
The mechanics of removing the impression involve separation
at the impression–tissue interface and stretching of the impression.
The first step is to break the physical adhesion between the tissue and the impression; therefore an impression material, such as
polyether, that wets the tissue well will require extra effort to break
the adhesion (seal) for the removal. The second step is stretching
the impression enough to pass under the height of contour of the
hard tissue to remove the impression; therefore using a material
of higher rigidity will require a greater force to stretch the impression to facilitate removal. Polysulfide has the lowest viscosity and
ranks as the least stiff of the elastomeric impression materials of
a similar consistency. This flexibility allows the set material to be
easily removed from undercut areas and from the mouth with a
minimum of stress.

CHAPTER 13

Auxiliary Materials

283

TABLE 13-2 Viscosity (×104 cp) of Single-Phase Vinyl Polysiloxanes at 37 °C

VISCOSITY AT 1 min
Material

2.5 rpm

0.5 rpm

2.5 rpm

Baysilex (Miles)

*

122.1 (2.8)

68.9 (2.5)

211.2 (14.7)

148.8 (1.2)

Green-Mouse (Parkell)

133.7 (8.9)

56.7 (2.9)

247.9 (14.9)

78.0 (2.8)

Hydrosil (Caulk)

194.2 (8.5)

129.4 (4.1)

398.1 (7.8)

153.5†

Imprint (3M)

106.5 (12.2)

79.7 (2.2)

245.1 (8.9)

146.2 (5.9)

Omnisil (Coe)

156.8 (11.5)

102.5 (1.9)

347.1 (5.2)

153.5‡

*

0.5 rpm

VISCOSITY AT 1.5 min

Numbers within parentheses represent the standard deviation of the mean.

†

Value at 75 seconds after mixing.

‡

Value at 77 seconds after mixing.

From Kim K-N, Craig RG, Koran A: Viscosity of monophase addition silicones as a function of shear rate, J Prosthet Dent 67:794, 1992.

In addition, all elastomeric impression materials are viscoelastic, and it is necessary to use a quick snap to minimize plastic
deformation of the impression during the final step of the removal
process. The phenomenon of viscoelastic behavior is discussed in
subsequent sections.

Preparation of Stone Casts and Dies
The hydrophobic characteristics of silicone impression make
pouring with gypsum products challenging because it increases
the potential of forming voids in gypsum dies and casts. One can
spray a thin layer of surfactant, also known as debubblizer, on the
impression to improve the surface wettability for the stone mixture. A dilute solution of soap is also an effective surfactant. One
can also select a hydrophilized addition silicone (discussed later)
to make impressions. Pouring of a stone cast in a polyether or
polysulfide impression does not require the aid of a surfactant.
The excellent dimensional stability of addition silicone and
polyether impression materials makes the construction of two or
three casts or dies from one impression possible. It is also possible
to construct successive stone dies or casts from polysulfide impressions when duplicate stone dies are needed. It should be noted that
each successive die will be less accurate than the first die constructed
from the impression. One should wait before the next pour after the
removal of the cast but not greater than 30 minutes. To minimize
tearing and gross distortion after the first pour, the clinician should
remove the excess gypsum-forming mass from undercut areas along
the periphery of the tray. Be aware that the stiffness of the impression material makes it difficult to remove the stone cast from the
impression. A weak stone cast may fracture during removal.

Properties of Elastomeric Impression Materials
The ability to make a cast or die that reproduces the surface details
and precise shape of the original tissue depends on various properties of the impression material. In this section, the properties
relevant to impression making with elastomers are described. The
comparative properties of elastomeric impression materials are
listed in Table 13-3.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is it not advisable to alter the base/catalyst (accelerator) ratio as a
means of controlling working or setting time?

Working and Setting Times
The working time begins at the start of mixing and ends just
before the elastic properties develop. The setting time is the
time elapsed from the beginning of mixing until the material has
enough strength to be removed from the mouth without distortion. Remember, however, that polymerization may continue for
a considerable time after. An increase in temperature accelerates
the rate of polymerization of all elastomeric impression materials;
therefore the effect of temperature on working and setting time
should be taken into consideration.
Altering the base/catalyst ratio will change the curing rate of
these materials. Normally, having more base materials in the mixture tends to increase the working and setting times. Keep in mind
that altering the base/catalyst ratio may not produce a predictable
change in the polymerization rate.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is rapid seating of an impression tray not advisable for a pseudoplastic
impression material?

Rheological Properties
Ideally, the impression material should flow freely and wet the tissue
as it is being injected to achieve adaptation, then become immobilized immediately, which keeps the material from flowing away
from the intended surface areas. The same property will facilitate
spreading of heavy-body material on the impression tray and retain
it in the tray. This phenomenon is called shear thinning, which was
discussed in Chapter 3, Rheology. All elastomeric impression materials exhibit shear-thinning characteristics before setting.
There are two categories of shear thinning: pseudoplasticity
and thixotropy. A pseudoplastic material displays decreasing viscosity with increasing shear stress and recovers its viscosity immediately upon termination of shear stress. A thixotropic material
does not exhibit a reduction of viscosity until sufficient agitation
(shear stress) is applied to overcome the yield stress of the material. After the termination of shear stress, it takes a specific time
to regain its previous viscous state. The latter is important because
it takes time for the impression material to adapt to the surface.
Manufacturers often emphasize their materials as being thixotropic and also note that the materials exhibit no slump when
injected on a vertical surface. They usually do not mention the
duration of the time delay.

284

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

TABLE 13-3 Comparative Properties of Elastomeric Impression Materials

Property

Polysulfide

Condensation Silicone

Addition Silicone

Polyether

Working time (min)

4–7

2.5–4

2–4

3

Setting time (min)

7–10

6–8

4–6.5

6

Tear strength (N/m)

2500–7000

2300–2600

1500–4300

1800–4800

Percent contraction (at 24 h)

0.40–0.45

0.38–0.60

0.14–0.17

0.19–0.24

Contact angle between set material and water (°)

82

98

98/53*

49

Hydrogen gas evolution (Y/N)

N

N

Y†

N

Automatic mixing (Y/N)

N

N

Y

Y

Custom tray (Y/N)

Y

N

N

N

Unpleasant odor (Y/N)

Y

N

N

N

N

N

Y

Y

Stiffness (value of 1 indicates greatest stiffness)

3

2 (1)

2 (1)

1 (2)

Distortion on removal (value of 1 indicates the
greatest and 4 the least potential distortion)

1

2

4

3

Multiple casts (Y/N)
‡

N, no; Y, yes, Y/N, yes or no.
*

The lower contact angle resulted from testing of a hydrophilized polyvinyl siloxane (PVS).

†

A hydrogen absorber is often included to eliminate hydrogen gas evolution.

‡

The numbers in the parentheses reflect the ranking when a soft formulation of polyether impression material is considered.

The benefit of thixotropy in impression making has been disputed because the time duration needed for the impression material
to recover the necessary viscosity may be unacceptable. However,
reports suggest that a thixotropic material should facilitate handling and make better impressions. One should be aware that these
studies are often conducted with unmixed base and catalyst pastes.
From the point of impression making, the viscosity of a uniformly
mixed impression also increases with polymerization, regardless of
the effect of thixotropy. Therefore the impact of thixotropy during
impression making may not be critical. In addition, confirming
the thixotropic nature of a material without reporting the time lag
required before regaining the intrinsic viscosity is not meaningful.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the viscoelastic property of impression materials dictate the way
an impression must be removed from a patient’s mouth?

Elasticity and Viscoelasticity
An impression material sustains some deformation as it is removed
from the mouth, but it must rebound to its preremoval dimensions to preserve the dimensions of the preparation. All elastomeric
impression materials are viscoelastic and exhibit both viscous and
elastic characteristics. Recall that viscous materials, such as honey,
resist shear flow but continue to flow as long as stress is applied.
Elastic materials strain (deform) when a stress is applied, but the
strain does not increase with time if no additional stress is applied,
and they immediately return to their original state once the stress is
removed. Essentially, viscoelastic materials exhibit time-dependent
strain. Thus, under a constant stress (load), the straining process
takes time to complete, and after the load is lifted, the recovery
process also takes time and allows a certain degree of plastic (nonrecoverable) deformation to take place. In addition, the amount
of deformation is related to the duration of loading. Therefore an

impression may sustain deformation after being subjected to various forces during removal and then, in time, recovers most of the
deformation after it is allowed to rest. This explains why removal of
the impression should be done quickly (in a “snap”) if possible, and
prolonged teasing or rocking should be avoided.
Polyvinyl siloxane impression materials exhibit the most elastic recovery of the currently available materials. Distortion on
removal from undercuts is virtually nonexistent. However, the
excellent elastic properties present a problem in that the heavybody putty material begins to acquire elastic properties while it
is still in the working-time stage. If the material is at an advanced
stage of elasticity and is compressed excessively during the seating
of the impression, distortion can occur when the material elastically rebounds (Figure 13-9).
The difficulty of removing earlier generations of polyether impressions from undercut areas is attributed to their high modulus of elasticity. The new generations of polyether impression materials, with
a stiffness lower than that of hydrophilic PVS, were formulated specifically to address stiffness concerns. However, the inherent hydrophilicity of these polyethers has resulted in greater adhesion between
the tissue and the material, which still makes impression removal
difficult. It is important to note that increased precision also implies
greater adaptation and resultant adhesion between the impression and the tissue, especially the teeth, and increased difficulty of
removing the impression. Because of the reduced rigidity, these new
generations of polyether impression material may not be the material of choice for the “triple-tray” technique, where the impression
material’s stiffness during removal compensates for the flexibility of
the tray. Although these new polyether impression materials are flexible during removal, they have been shown to increase their elastic
moduli for some time after removal. As the formulation of impression materials continues to evolve to accommodate specific needs,
grouping the stiffness of impression materials based on the backbone
of polymer chains is becoming less meaningful.

CHAPTER 13

• Figure 13-10 A, A properly retracted soft tissue will leave a narrow
space to be filled by the light-viscosity impression material. B, The impression material has torn during removal.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What is the difference between tear strength and tear energy? Why is tear
energy more meaningful for impression making?

t

Auxiliary Materials

Tear Strength
The subgingival regions of the impression are often very thin and
can tear during impression removal, leaving a portion embedded
within the gingival sulcus (Figure 13-10). The tear strength is
influenced by consistency and the manner of removing the materials. A heavier consistency usually increases the tear strength of the
material. The addition of a thinning agent to the mixture reduces
the tear strength slightly but increases the flexibility substantially.
A quick snap in removing the impression usually increases the tear
strength because the action increases the resistance of the material
to deformation (strain).
Tear strength measures the resistance of an elastomeric material
to fracture when subjected to a tensile force acting perpendicular to a surface flaw. Figure 13-11 shows two specimen designs
that have been used by the dental community for testing impression materials. The amount of force needed to tear a specified test
specimen, divided by the thickness of the specimen, is called the
tear strength. Note that the calculation of tear strength disregards
the dimensional change for the test specimen. For the same tooth
preparation, a material that can be stretched a great deal elastically
before fracture will likely remain intact, whereas a rigid material
can fracture at a much lower tensile strain at a higher level of force.
The latter will appear to have higher tear strength but is more
likely to fracture than the former. Thus the use of tear strength
to distinguish the resistance of an impression material to tearing
is not very meaningful. The property that can delineate the combined behavior of stress and strain is energy (Chapter 4, Resilience
and Toughness), which includes the dimensional change of the

t

A

Force (F)

Tear strength =

B

285

Tear energy =

F
t
F (1+ )
t

Distance (mm)

• Figure 13-11 A, Two configurations of tear-strength test specimens: right-angle design (left) and trouser
design configuration (right). B, Force–distance curve of a typical tear test and calculation of tear strength
and tear energy. The plateau of the curve (dotted line) indicates the force (F) needed for initiation and propagation of the crack. The thickness of the specimen is t, and the extension ratio is λ, which equals the extended portion of the specimen length at the end of the test divided by the original length of the specimen.

286

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

material in the calculation. The tear energy is determined by the
force (F) needed to keep the crack propagating, the thickness of
the specimen (t) and the extension ratio (λ). The extension ratio
is the extended portion of the length (Δl) at the end of the test
divided by the original length of the specimen (l) (Figure 13-11).
The calculated value also has the units of N/m, which can be converted to N⋅m/m2 and then J/m2, an expression of energy per unit
area.
Polysulfide materials have the highest resistance to tearing.
Therefore thin sections of polysulfide impression material are
less likely to tear than polyether or silicone impression materials of a similar thickness. However, because of their susceptibility to permanent distortion, polysulfide impressions may distort
rather than tear. This presents a problem because tearing can be
seen immediately by carefully checking the impression, whereas
distortion is difficult to detect by visual inspection. Because the
strain rate influences tear resistance and permanent deformation,
the impression should be strained rapidly for as short a time as
possible to minimize adverse effects.

do not have to be poured with a gypsum product immediately.
Research has shown that pouring between 24 hours and 1 week
produced casts as accurate as those made in the first hour. Multiple
pouring of the impressions and removal of the casts will not alter the
dimensional stability of the impression, even though a substantial
force is needed each time a cast is removed from the impression.
One variable that can have a negative effect on the polyether
impression is the absorption of water or fluids and the simultaneous leaching of the water-soluble plasticizer during disinfectant
immersion longer than 10 minutes. However, recent research has
shown that 30-minute immersion does not have a negative effect
on the dimensions. Nonetheless, the polyether impression should
be stored in a dry (relative humidity below 50%), cool environment to maintain its accuracy and should never be left for protracted periods in disinfecting solutions.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are hydrophilic materials potentially more susceptible to distortion
during disinfection prior to being poured with a gypsum-forming product?

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the main causes of impression inaccuracy?

Dimensional Stability
Dimensional stability refers to the lack of dimensional changes of the
impression over time. There are six major sources of dimensional
change: (1) polymerization shrinkage, (2) loss of a condensation
reaction by-products (water or alcohol), (3) thermal contraction
from oral temperature to room temperature, (4) absorption of
water or disinfectant over a period of time, (5) incomplete recovery of deformation because of viscoelastic behavior, and (6) incomplete recovery because of plastic deformation. Figure 13-12 shows
the mean linear contraction for four elastomers using the method
described in American National Standards Institute American Dental Association (ANSI/ADA) Specification No. 19 and ISO 4823.
Figure 13-12 shows that if maximal accuracy is to be maintained, the slurry mix for a stone die or cast should be poured within
the first 30 minutes after the polysulfide and condensation silicone
impression are removed from the mouth. The stability of the addition silicone and polyether materials suggests that these impressions

Linear contraction (%)

0.8

Condensation silicone

0.7
0.6
Polysulfide

0.5
0.4

Polyether

0.3
Addition silicone

0.2
0.1
0

6

12
Time (h)

18

24

• Figure 13-12 Representative linear contraction of four elastomeric impression materials.

Disinfection
All elastomeric impression materials can be disinfected with all
disinfectants registered with the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) without the loss of surface quality or accuracy if the
disinfection time is short. The impressions should be immersed
for the time specified for each disinfectant, as discussed in the
last section. After disinfection, the impression should be removed,
rinsed, and poured with the gypsum product as soon as possible.
Table 13-4 shows a guide for selecting appropriate disinfection
methods for all types of impressions that are subsequently transferred to a dental laboratory.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the surfactant added to hydrophilize PVS affect the contact angle
of water droplets during the setting and pouring of casts with gypsum?

Wettability of Impression Materials and Hydrophilization
of PVS
The contact angles of distilled water on set silicone impressions are
approximately 100°, which makes this group of materials the most
hydrophobic among all elastomeric impression materials. The use
of a more hydrophobic impression material may lead to a high
frequency of voids in the cast. It is possible to spray a surfactant
on these hydrophobic impressions prior to pouring with gypsum
mixtures. A nonionic surfactant may be added to the bulk of the
PVS during the manufacturing process, and the resultant material
is called a hydrophilized PVS.
In vitro studies of the surface wettability of set impressions
typically use distilled water as the probing liquid. The results confirm that there are significant reductions in the contact angles of
hydrophilized PVS relative to their nonhydrophilized counterparts. The use of an aqueous solution saturated with CaSO4 yields
similar results. Examination of stone casts confirms that elastomers, which exhibit the least contact angle with water, also produce stone casts with fewer voids.
The use of optical tensiometry, which analyzes the shape of
liquid drops on the surface using a video image, allows observation of the contact angles of water droplets on freshly mixed
impression materials in real time. Numerous studies have reported
a decrease in water contact angles on silicones, hydrophilized PVS,

CHAPTER 13

Auxiliary Materials

287

TABLE 13-4 Guide for the Selection of Appropriate Disinfection Methods for Impressions Transported to a

Dental Laboratory
Material

Method

Recommended Disinfectant

Comments

Alginate

Immersion with caution
Use only disinfectant for a short-term
exposure time (<10 min for alginate)

Chlorine compounds or iodophors

Short-term glutaraldehyde has been shown
to be acceptable, but time is inadequate for
disinfection.

Agar

Do not immerse in alkaline glutaraldehyde!

Polysulfide and
silicone

Immersion

Glutaraldehydes, chlorine compounds,
iodophors, phenolics

Disinfectants requiring more than 30-min
exposure times are not recommended.

Polyether

Immerse with cautionUse disinfectant
only for a short exposure time (<10 min)

Chlorine compounds or iodophors

ADA recommends any of the disinfectant
classes; however, short-term exposures
are essential to avoid distortion.

ZOE impression
paste

Immersion preferred; spraying can be
used for bite registrations

Glutaraldehydes or iodophors

Not compatible with chlorine compounds!
Phenolic spray can be used.

ADA, American Dental Association; ZOE, zinc oxide–eugenol.

and polyethers over the setting period. This decrease can be as
much as 70° for hydrophilized PVS and less for polyether. Chemical analyses of water droplets show that they all acquire substances
from their respective impression materials. For hydrophilized
PVS, the water droplets absorb a sufficient quantity of surfactant
and become a liquid of lower surface tension. The lowering of surface tension makes water droplets spread wider on the surface of
PVS, yielding lower contact angles. This observation leads to the
hypothesis that hydrophilicity of the PVS does not change much,
but the acquired surfactant has reduced the surface tension of the
probing water, making it readily spread over the PVS. Some clinical observations seem to support this hypothesis because there is
no difference between nonhydrophilized and hydrophilized PVS
with respect to the reproducibility of detail on wet surfaces. However, another clinical study reports that hydrophilized PVS yields
a significantly higher proportion of void-free impressions than
its nonhydrophilized counterpart. For polyethers, the substances
acquired by the water droplets represent a low-molecular-weight
compound associated with polyethers, and their effect on the surface tension of the water droplet is small. Thus a smaller decrease
in the contact angle is observed.
As soon as hydrophilized PVS encounters oral fluids during
impression making, it begins to release surfactant to its surroundings. It is known that there is an adequate amount of surfactant
trapped on the surface of set PVS impressions, thereby providing hydrophilicity for the pouring of gypsum dies. Whereas one
might believe that the decrease of contact angle over the period of
setting is equivalent to good wetting of the impression material
on moist tooth surfaces, the clinical relevance remains unclear for
two reasons. First, the decrease in contact angle may be attributed
mainly to the lowering of the surface tension of the water droplets by the surfactant, so the actual improvement in the hydrophilicity of the impression may be much less significant than it
appears. Second, there are conflicting clinical observations. This
conflict is not surprising when one realizes that some materials
contain very hydrophilic surfactants that are readily leached from
the surface, whereas others contain surfactants that are balanced
in their hydrophilic and lipophilic properties so that the lipophilic
end remains buried near the surface while the hydrophilic chain
is exposed on the surface. In the latter case, very little leaching
occurs.

Effect of Mishandling
The failure to produce an accurate epoxy or gypsum die or cast is
more likely associated with an error in handling rather than a deficiency in the properties of the impression material. The common
failures experienced with impression materials and their causes are
summarized in Table 13-5. A summary of the characteristics of the
elastomeric impression materials is given in Table 13-6.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the difference between a solution and a hydrocolloid?

Hydrocolloids
A colloid is a substance that is microscopically dispersed uniformly throughout another medium. This is different from a solution, as defined in Chapter 2, Solutes and Solvents. A solution is
a single phase, whereas a colloidal system consists of the dispersed
phase and the dispersion phase. If the dispersion phase of a colloidal system is water, it is called a hydrocolloid. The sizes of the
colloid particles range from 1 to 200 nm.
Success in impression making depends on the transformation
from a flowable state to a solid elastomeric state. This change of state
with hydrocolloids is called the sol–gel transformation. A sol is a colloidal dispersion in a continuous liquid medium, and a gel is a suspension that behaves like an elastic solid. If a hydrocolloid contains
an adequate concentration of the dispersed phase, the sol, under certain conditions, may change to a gel. In the gel state, the dispersed
phase forms agglomerates in the form of chains or fibrils, also called
micelles. The fibrils may branch and intermesh to form a brush-heap
structure, which can be envisioned as resembling the intermeshing of
tree branches or twigs in a brush pile. The dispersion medium is held
in the interstices between the fibrils by capillary attraction or adhesion. In this section, the characteristics of the two hydrocolloids used
for impression making, agar and alginate, are described.

Agar (Reversible Hydrocolloid)
The sol–gel transformation of agar is a physical phenomenon
induced by temperature change. The gel liquefies when it is heated
to 70 to 100 °C, which is known as the liquefaction temperature,

288

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

TABLE 13-5 Common Failures Occurring With the Use of Elastomeric Impression Materials

Type of Failure

Causes

Rough or uneven impression
surface

Incomplete polymerization caused by premature removal from the mouth, improper ratio or mixing of components, or
presence of oil or other organic material, such as plaque, on the teeth
For addition silicone, surface agents, such as latex, that contaminate the material and inhibit polymerization
Too rapid polymerization from high humidity or temperature
Excessively high accelerator/base ratio with condensation silicone

Bubbles

Air incorporated during hand mixing

Irregularly shaped voids

Moisture or debris on surface of teeth

Rough or chalky stone cast

Inadequate cleaning of impression
Excess water that is not blown off the impression
Excess wetting agent left on impression
Premature removal of cast; improper powder/water ratio of stone
Failure to delay pour of addition silicone that does not contain a palladium salt for at least 20 min

Distortion

Resin tray not aged sufficiently; still undergoing polymerization shrinkage
Lack of adhesion of elastomer to the tray caused by not applying enough coats of adhesive, filling tray with material too
soon after applying adhesive, or using incorrect adhesive
Lack of mechanical retention to the impression tray
Excessive bulk of material
Insufficient relief for the reline material (if such technique is used)
Development of elastic properties in the material before tray is fully seated
Continued pressure against impression material that has developed elastic properties
Movement of tray during polymerization
Premature removal of impression from mouth
Improper removal of impression from mouth
Delayed pouring of the polysulfide or condensation silicone impression

TABLE 13-6 Characteristics of Elastomeric Impression Materials

Generic Type

Advantages

Disadvantages

Polysulfide

Long working time
High tear resistance
Margins easily seen
Moderate cost

Requires custom tray
Stretching leads to distortion
Compatible with stone
Stains clothing
Obnoxious odor
Pour within 1 h

Condensation silicone (putty wash)

Putty for custom tray
Clean and pleasant
Good working time
Margins easily seen

High polymerization shrinkage
Volatile by-product
Low tear strength
Hydrophobic
Pour immediately

Vinyl polysiloxane

One material
Putty for custom tray
Automix dispense
Clean and pleasant
Margins easily seen
Ideally elastic
Pour repeatedly
Stable; delay pour

Hydrophobic
No flow if sulcus is moist
Low tear strength
Putty displaces wash
Wash has low tear strength
Putty too stiff
Putty and wash separate
Difficult to pour cast

Polyether

Fast-setting
Clean
Automix dispense
Least hydrophobic of all elastomers
Margins easily seen
Good stability
Delay pour
Shelf life: 2 y

Stiff, high modulus
Bitter taste
Need to block undercuts
Absorbs water
Leaches components
High cost

CHAPTER 13

Auxiliary Materials

289

TABLE 13-6 Characteristics of Elastomeric Impression Materials—cont’d

Generic Type

Advantages

Disadvantages

Agar

Moist field OK
Accurate and pleasant
Hydrophilic
Low cost
Long shelf-life

Requires special equipment
Thermal discomfort
Tears easily
Pour immediately
Difficult to see margins and details

Alginate

Moist field OK
Clean and pleasant
Hydrophilic
Low cost
Long shelf-life

Not accurate/rough
Tears easily
Pour immediately
Can retard setting of gypsum

and the sol solidifies around 37 to 50 °C, which is known as the
gelation temperature. Thus agar is called a reversible hydrocolloid.
The gelation temperature is critical for impression making. If it is
too high, the heat from the sol may injure the oral tissues. Conversely, if the gelation temperature is too far below oral temperature, it will be impossible to make the impression because the sol
will not convert to a gel in the oral cavity.

Composition
Agar, a polysaccharide, is the main active ingredient in the material, whereas water is the major constituent in the agar impression material. Various fillers—such as borax, diatomaceous earth,
clay, silica, wax, rubber, and similar inert powders—are used to
control strength, viscosity, and rigidity, as previously discussed
for elastomeric impression materials. Thymol and glycerin may
also be added as a bactericidal agent and plasticizer, respectively.
Pigments and flavors are usually included as well. The hydrocolloid is usually supplied in two forms, syringe material and tray
material.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the purpose of having three water tanks set at three different
temperatures in a conditioning unit for agar impression materials?

Making Agar Impression
This process requires a three-compartment conditioning unit
(Figure 13-13) for the agar tray material that allows liquefaction,
storage, and tempering; the agar syringe material is used only in
the liquefaction and storage compartments.
The first step in impression making is to liquefy the hydrocolloid gel in the tube in boiling water at 100 °C. The tube is then
placed in a storage bath at 65 °C to retain the sol condition until it
is needed. For the immediate preparation step, the impression tray
is filled with hydrocolloid sol from the tube taken from the storage
bath, a gauze pad is placed over the top of the tray material, and
the tray is placed in the tempering compartment (at about 45 °C).
The tempering time is 3 to 10 minutes, just sufficient to ensure
that all the material has reached a low temperature of 55 °C or less.
In any case, the loaded tray should never be left in this bath for
more than 10 minutes because partial gelation can occur, thereby
making the material unusable.
Just before tempering of the tray material is completed, the syringe
material is taken directly from the storage compartment and applied
to the prepared teeth. The syringe material is never tempered because
it must be maintained in a fluid state to enhance adaptation to the

• Figure 13-13 Conditioning unit for agar impression materials. The three
compartments are used for liquefying the material (left), storing after boiling
(middle), and tempering the tray hydrocolloid (right). The number on the
display shows the temperature setting in °F. Also shown in the figure are
the tray hydrocolloid, a syringe for injecting hydrocolloids, and an impression tray. Note that the two tubes extending out from the handle of the tray
are for water circulation.

tissues. Normally, the temperature of the syringe material is cooled
sufficiently as it is extruded, so it is comfortable for the patient. The
syringe material is first applied to the base of the preparation; then
the remainder of the prepared tooth is covered. The tip of the syringe
is held close to the tooth, and it remains embedded below the surface of the syringe material to prevent entrapment of air bubbles.
The water-soaked outer layer of the hydrocolloid-loaded tray and the
gauze covering the tray impression material are removed to ensure
firm bonding to the syringe hydrocolloid. The tray is immediately
brought into position, seated with light pressure, and held with a
very light force. Too much pressure may displace the syringed agar
sol from the tooth and distort the impression.
Gelation is accelerated by circulating cool water (approximately
18 to 21 °C) through the tray for 3 to 5 minutes. During the gelation process, the tray must be held in the mouth until gelation has
proceeded to a point at which the gel strength is sufficient to resist
deformation or fracture.
As discussed earlier in the section on elastomeric impression
materials, hydrocolloid materials exhibit viscoelastic behavior; therefore it is necessary to remove the impression with a
snap and not to tease it out. Any twisting or flexure should
be avoided. When properly done, the resulting impression will

290

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

H

H
O

O

OH
H

O

H

O
H

HO

H

O

O

HO
OH

H
H

OH
H

O

H

OH

Guluronic acid

O

H

OH
H

H

O

H

OH

OH
O

OH

O

H
H

H

H

HO

H

O

O
H

OH

Mannuronic acid

• Figure 13-14 Structural formula of alginic acid. Alginic acid is a linear copolymer with homopolymeric
blocks of β-D-mannuronic acid and its epimer α-L-guluronic acid covalently linked together in different
sequences or blocks.

TABLE 13-7 Powder Composition for an Alginate

Impression Material
Component

Function

Weight Percentage

Potassium alginate

Soluble alginate

15

Calcium sulfate

Reactor

16

Zinc oxide

Filler particles

4

Potassium titanium fluoride

Gypsum hardener

3

Diatomaceous earth

Filler particles

60

Sodium phosphate

Retarder

2

accurately reproduce the dimensions and details of hard and
soft tissues.

Distortion During Gelation
Some contraction occurs because of the physical change during the
sol–gel transformation. If the material is held firmly in the tray, the
impression material will shrink toward the center of its mass, thereby
creating larger dies. Because the sol is a poor thermal conductor,
rapid cooling may cause a stress concentration near the tray where
the gelation first takes place. Consequently, water at room temperature is more suitable for cooling the impression than is ice water.

alginate gel. It also produces a smooth texture and ensures the
formation of a firm gel surface that is not tacky. Zinc oxide also
acts as a filler and has some influence on the physical properties
and setting time of the gel. Calcium sulfate dihydrate is a reactor
providing calcium ions that crosslink the alginate sol. A retarder
is added to control the setting time. A fluoride, such as potassium
titanium fluoride, is added as an accelerator for the setting of the
stone to ensure a hard, dense cast surface when the stone sets in
the impression. This fluoride is also called a surface hardener.
When powder in the alginate can is fluffed to break the particles
loose, the diatomaceous earth, which is made up of fine porous silica
particles, will become airborne when the lid is removed. Long-term
exposure through inhalation of these fine silica particles can cause silicosis and pulmonary hypersensitivity. To reduce the dust encountered
after tumbling, manufacturers have introduced a “dustless” alginate in
which they have incorporated polyethylene glycol or polypropylene
glycol in the alginate powder to agglomerate the particles. This causes
the powder to become denser and less able to become airborne. Color
indicators have been added in some formulations to reveal the stage
of the setting reaction. This is to assist the operator in deciding when
to proceed to the next step of impression making.
Two-paste alginate impression materials are also available; these
are known as modified alginates. One paste contains a sol of alginate, fillers, retarder, and other ingredients like glycols and dextrose. The other paste consists of gypsum dihydrate, fillers, retarder,
glycerol or glycols, gypsum surface modifier, and some silicone oil.

CRITICAL QUESTION

Alginate (Irreversible Hydrocolloid)
The setting of alginate hydrocolloid is a process of crosslinking
alginic acids with calcium ions. The alginic acid, which is extracted
from brown seaweed, is a linear copolymer of β-D-mannuronic
acid and α-L-guluronic acid (Figure 13-14). Alginates with higher
levels of guluronic acid normally show a stronger interaction with
calcium and, hence, yield greater gel strength. For impressionmaking purposes, the alginate is richer in mannuronic acid.

Composition
The chief active ingredient in the alginate impression materials
is one of the soluble alginates, such as sodium, potassium, or triethanolamine alginate. Table 13-7 shows a formula for the powder
component of an alginate impression material. The diatomaceous
earth acts as a filler to increase the strength and stiffness of the

How does the retarder optimize the working time of alginate impression
material?

Gelation Process
The typical sol–gel reaction can be described simply as a reaction
of soluble alginate with calcium ions from calcium sulfate and
the formation of an insoluble calcium alginate. Structurally, calcium ions replace the sodium or potassium ions of two adjacent
molecules to produce a crosslinked complex or polymer network
(Figure 13-15). The production of the calcium alginate is so rapid
that it does not allow enough working time. A water-soluble
phosphate salt (e.g., trisodium phosphate) is added to the composition as a retarder to extend the working time. The strategy is
that the calcium ions react preferentially with the phosphate ions
in the solution. Thus the rapid reaction between calcium ions and

CHAPTER 13

Auxiliary Materials

291

O

O
Na
Na
O
C=O
O

Ca
5

O

C=O
O
O

O

O

O
C=O

O
C=O

O

O
Na
Na
O
C=O
O

Ca

O
C=O
O
O

O

O
C=O

O
C=O

O
Na
Na
O
C=O

O

3

2

1

O

O
O

Setting time (min)

4

O

O

0
0

10

20
30
Temperature (°C)

40

• Figure 13-16 Effect of water temperature on the setting time of an alginate impression material.

Ca
O

C=O

a new office or clinic location, the effect of the hardness of the tap
water on setting time should be considered as a possible cause.

• Figure 13-15 Schematic illustration of sodium alginate crosslinked with
calcium ions. The base molecules represent the sodium salt of alginic
acid, in which hydrogen atoms of carboxyl groups are replaced by sodium
atoms. Apart from polar groups, all side chains have been omitted for
simplification.

CRITICAL QUESTION

the soluble alginate is deferred until phosphate ions from trisodium phosphate are exhausted. The amount of retarder is adjusted
to provide the stated setting time.

Preparation of Alginate Impression Materials
The measured powder is added slowly to the premeasured water
that has already been poured into a clean rubber bowl. The powder is incorporated into the water by carefully mixing with a metal
or plastic spatula that is flexible to adapt well to the wall of the
mixing bowl. If the powder is placed in the mixing bowl first, penetration of the water to the bottom of the bowl is inhibited, and
a longer mixing time may be required to ensure a homogeneous
mix. Care should be taken to avoid incorporating excessive air into
the mix. A vigorous figure-eight stropping motion is best, with the
mix being wiped or stropped against the side of the rubber-mixing
bowl to express air bubbles. All the powder must be incorporated
thoroughly in the water.
The mixing time is particularly important; 45 seconds to
1 minute is generally enough, depending on the brand and
type of alginate (fast set or regular set). The instructions on
the package should be followed precisely for the mixing time,
working time, and setting time for the material one is using.
The result should be a smooth, creamy mixture that does not
readily drip off the spatula when it is raised from the bowl.
Several mechanical mixing devices are available for the alginate
materials. They include a rotating mixing bowl; a mechanical
mixer with a time-control unit; a vacuum mixer for powder/
water mixing; and a dynamic mechanical mixer, like the one for
elastomers (Figure 13-7, D), for two-paste alginate products.
Their principal benefits are convenience, speed, and the reduction of human error.

Controlling Setting Time
A slight modification in the water–powder (W/P) ratio or the
mixing time can have marked effects on two important properties
of the gel, tear strength and elasticity; thus the setting time is best
regulated by the amount of retarder added during the manufacturing process. Usually, the manufacturers make both fast-setting
alginate (1.5 to 3 minutes) and normal-setting alginate (3 to
4.5 minutes) to give clinicians a choice of the materials that best
suit their working style.
Clinicians, however, can safely influence the setting time by
altering the temperature of the water (Figure 13-16). The temperature of the mixing water should be controlled carefully within
a degree or two of a standard temperature, usually 20 °C, so that a
constant and reliable setting time can be obtained. In hot weather,
special precautions should be taken to provide cool water for mixing so that premature gelation does not occur. It may even be
necessary to precool the mixing bowl and spatula, especially when
small amounts of impression material are to be mixed.
Tap water naturally contains certain quantities of metallic ions,
primarily calcium and magnesium. It has been shown that compared
with distilled water for mixing of alginate impression material, the
use of tap water with a high hardness may accelerate the setting of
the alginate. If one observes that the setting time has decreased in

Why is it especially important to add water to the rubber mixing bowl before
adding the powder when one is mixing a fast-setting alginate impression
material?

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Clean equipment is important; contaminants, such as small
amounts of gypsum left in the bowl from a previous mix of plaster
or stone, can accelerate the set. It is best to use separate bowls for
mixing alginate and stone.
Ideally, the powder should be weighed and not measured by
volume using a scoop. However, unless a grossly incorrect or
inconsistent method is used for scooping the powder, the variations in individual mixes should have no measurable effect on the
physical properties.

Making Alginate Impression
It is imperative that the impression be retained on the tray so that
it can be withdrawn from the perimeter of the teeth. Therefore a
perforated metal tray is preferred. If a plastic tray or a metal rimlock tray is selected, a thin layer of alginate tray adhesive should be
applied and allowed to dry completely before mixing and loading
the alginate in the tray. Alginate is a weak material; therefore a
sufficient bulk of material is needed. The thickness of the alginate impression between the tray and the tissues should be at least
3 mm.
Most set alginate materials improve in elasticity over time; this
minimizes distortion of the material during impression removal,
thus permitting superior reproduction of undercut areas. Data
clearly indicate that the alginate impression should not be removed
from the mouth for at least 3 minutes after gelation has occurred.
It is possible to leave an alginate impression in the mouth too
long. With certain alginates, it has been shown that if the impression is held for 6 to 7 minutes after gelation rather than 3 minutes,
significant distortion may result.
Because alginate is a viscoelastic material, the speed of removal
must be a compromise between a rapid movement and a slower
rate that is more comfortable for the patient. Usually an alginate
impression does not adhere to the oral tissues as well as some
of the elastomers do, so it is easier to break the seal (“suction”)
first and then remove the alginate impression rapidly. It is always
best to avoid torqueing or twisting the impression to remove it
quickly.
Strength
Any deviation from the manufacturer’s instructions can have adverse
effects on the gel strength. For example, if too much or too little
water is used in mixing, the final gel will be weakened, making it less
elastic. Insufficient spatulation results in failure of the ingredients to
dissolve sufficiently so that the chemical reactions can proceed uniformly throughout the mass. Overmixing breaks up the formation
of the calcium alginate network and reduces its strength.
Shelf Life
Two major factors that affect the shelf life of alginate impression materials are storage temperature and moisture contamination from ambient air. The alginate impression powder can
be purchased in individually sealed bags or in bulk form in
a can. The individual bags are preferred because there is less
chance for contamination during storage and the correct W/P
ratio is ensured. Nevertheless, the bulk form in a can is by far
the most popular. If the bulk powder form of alginate is used,
the lid should be firmly replaced on the container as soon as
possible after dispensing the powder so that moisture contamination is minimized.
An expiration date under a stated condition of storage should
be clearly identified by the manufacturer on each package. It is
best not to stock more than a year’s supply in the dental office. The
material should be stored in a cool, dry environment.

Properties of Hydrocolloid Impression Materials
The quality of a stone cast depends on the properties of the hydrocolloid impressions before pouring and the potential interaction between
gypsum and alginate during the setting of the gypsum. In this section, details on dimensional stability, gypsum/hydrocolloid interaction, accuracy, disinfection, and effects of mishandling are described.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can distortion of a hydrocolloid impression be minimized during storage?

Dimensional Stability
Once the hydrocolloid impression is removed from the mouth and
exposed to air at room temperature, some shrinkage associated with
syneresis and evaporation will occur. Conversely, if the impression
is immersed in water, swelling caused by imbibition can occur.
Figure 13-17 shows that the material has shrunk in air and excessive expansion has occurred during subsequent imbibition.
Thermal changes also contribute to dimensional change. With
alginates, impressions shrink slightly because of the thermal differential between mouth temperature (37 °C) and room temperature
(23 °C). The agar hydrocolloids experience a temperature shift in
the opposite direction, from the chilled, water-cooled tray (15 °C)
to the warmer room temperature. Even this slight change can
cause the impression to expand and become less accurate.
If pouring of the impression must be delayed, the impression
should be rinsed in tap water, disinfected, wrapped in a surgical
paper towel, saturated with water, and placed in a sealed plastic
bag or humidor.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why do both agar and alginate include a gypsum hardener, and how does it
function?

Compatibility With Gypsum
Agar impression material contains borax, which is a known retarder
for the setting of gypsum products. The gelation process of alginate impressions produces not only insoluble calcium alginate but
also sodium sulfate, which is a gypsum-setting accelerator at low
concentration but becomes a retarder at a higher concentration.
In addition, polysaccharide also inhibits the setting of gypsum.
Because of retardation, the surfaces of the gypsum models prepared from hydrocolloid may be too soft for use as dies or casts.
0.2
Dimensional change (%)

292

0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
0

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
Time (min)

• Figure 13-17 Linear contraction of a representative reversible hydrocolloid in air (31% to 42% relative humidity) within the initial and subsequent
expansions in water. The dashed line indicates the start of water immersion.

CHAPTER 13

The deficiency of gypsum setting can be overcome by immers
ing agar impressions in a solution containing a gypsum setting accelerator, such as 2% potassium sulfate solution, prior
to pouring the impression with the gypsum-forming product or
by incorporating a gypsum surface hardener, such as potassium
titanium fluoride, in alginate (Table 13-7). The solubility of
potassium titanium fluoride is about 1.3 g per 100 mL of water
at 20 °C. The fluoride on the surface of alginate will form fine
calcium fluoride precipitates with the calcium from the gypsum.
Fine calcium fluoride particles become nuclei that accelerate the
setting of gypsum.
A rough stone surface will result if excess rinsing water has collected on the surface of the impression at the time of pouring the
stone mixture. A dried gel surface, on the other hand, will result in
its adherence to the surface of the cast, which can result in tearing
upon its removal. The surface of the impression should be shiny
but with no visible water film or droplets at the time of pouring.
After the impression has been filled with stone, somewhat superior
stone surfaces may be obtained if the impression is placed in a
humidor while the stone hardens.
The stone cast or die should be kept in contact with the impression for a minimum of 30 minutes, preferably for 60 minutes,
before the impression is separated from the cast. A longer time
may be needed for slow-setting gypsum. It is wise to separate the
cast from the impression within a reasonable time so that desiccation of the hydrocolloid does not occur, thereby avoiding abrasion
of the gypsum cast during its removal.

Auxiliary Materials

293

Disinfection
Because the hydrocolloid impression must be poured within a short
time after removal from the mouth, the disinfection procedure
should be relatively rapid to prevent a dimensional change. The
current protocol for disinfecting hydrocolloid impressions recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is to use
household bleach (1-to-10 dilution), iodophors, or synthetic phenols
as disinfectants. After the impression has been rinsed thoroughly, the
disinfectant can be sprayed liberally on the exposed surface. The
impression is then immediately wrapped in a disinfectant-soaked
paper towel and placed in a sealed plastic bag for 10 minutes. Finally,
the wrapped impression is removed from the bag, unwrapped,
rinsed, and shaken to remove excess water. The impression is then
poured with the stone of choice. An alternative disinfection method
is by immersion, but this should not exceed 10 minutes (Table 13-4).
Accuracy
Agar is among the most accurate of impression materials. Most
alginate impressions are not capable of reproducing the finer details
observed in impressions with other elastomeric impression materials.
Nevertheless, alginate materials are sufficiently accurate that they can
be used to make impressions for removable partial dentures.
Effects of Mishandling
Common causes of failures encountered with alginate impression
materials are summarized in Table 13-8.

Duplicating Materials

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the optimal method for disinfecting an alginate hydrocolloid
impression without causing significant distortion or degradation?

Both types of hydrocolloids are used in the dental laboratory to duplicate dental casts or models for the construction of prosthetic appliances and orthodontic models. Agar hydrocolloid is more popular in

TABLE 13-8 Common Causes of Failed Hydrocolloid Impressions

CAUSES
Effect

Agar

Alginate

Grainy material

Inadequate boiling
Storage temperature too low
Storage time too long

Improper mixing
Prolonged mixing
Excessive gelation
Water/powder ratio too low

Separation of syringe materials

Water-soaked tray material surface not removed material
Premature gelation of either material

Not applicable

Tearing

Inadequate bulk
Premature removal from mouth
Syringe material partially gelled when tray was seated

Inadequate bulk
Moisture contamination
Premature removal from mouth
Prolonged mixing

External bubbles

Gelation of syringe material, preventing flow

Undue gelation preventing flow
Air incorporated during mixing

Irregularly shaped voids

Material too cold

Moisture or debris on tissue

Rough or chalky stone model

Inadequate cleansing of impression
Excess water or hardening solution left in the impression
Premature removal of die
Improper manipulation of stone
Air drying of the impression before pouring

Inadequate cleaning of impression
Excess water left in impression
Premature removal of the impression
Model left in impression too long
Improper manipulation of stone

Distortion

Impression not poured within 30 min
Movement of tray during gelation
Premature removal from mouth
Improper removal from mouth
Use of ice water during initial stages of gelation

Impression not poured immediately
Movement of tray during gelation
Premature removal from mouth
Improper removal from mouth

294

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

the lab because it can be used many times. In addition, with intermittent stirring, agar hydrocolloid can be kept in a liquid form for 1
or 2 weeks at a constant pouring temperature. These factors make the
cost of reversible impression materials quite reasonable.
The hydrocolloid-type duplicating materials have the same
composition as the impression materials, but their water content is
higher. Consequently, the agar or alginate content is lower, which
influences their compressive strength and percent permanent set.
These property requirements are identified in ISO 14356:2003,
Dentistry—Duplicating material.

during the fitting of the tray. A compound stick may be softened
over a flame, but the sheet should be immersed in warm water to
ensure uniform softening of the material. The compound should
not be allowed to boil or ignite over the flame, and prolonged
immersion or overheating in the water can alter the chemistry of
the compound and the properties. Cold water can be sprayed on
the compound to assist in cooling.
Type II is a higher-fusing material in sheet form, also called
tray compound, and can be used to make primary impressions of
soft tissue to be used as a tray to support a thin layer of a second impression material, such as ZOE wash paste, hydrocolloid,
impression plaster, or elastomer, to make the secondary impression of the soft tissue.

Inelastic Impression Materials
Inelastic impression materials are brittle materials that exhibit an
insignificant amount of elastic deformation before fracture. They
include impression plaster, impression compound, and ZOE
impression paste. Because of their limited use in clinical dentistry
today, the discussion is brief and focused on compositions and
applications.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does ZOE set faster in a humid environment?

Zinc Oxide–Eugenol Impression Paste
The reaction between zinc oxide and eugenol yields a relatively
hard mass that has been involved in a wide range of applications in
dentistry, including use as an impression material for edentulous
mouths, a surgical dressing, a bite registration paste, a temporary
filling material, a root canal filling material, a cementing medium
(Chapter 7, Zinc Oxide Eugenol and Non-Eugenol Cements),
and a temporary relining material for dentures.
ZOE impression pastes are dispensed as two pastes. One tube
contains zinc oxide and vegetable or mineral oil; the other contains
eugenol, rosin, filler, and resinous balsam. The vegetable or mineral
oil acts as a plasticizer and aids in offsetting the action of the eugenol
as an irritant. The addition of rosin facilitates the speed of the reaction and yields a smoother, more homogeneous product. Resinous
balsam is often used to increase flow and improve mixing properties.
The setting reaction requires an ionic medium in which it can
proceed at any desired rate. It is well established that the first reaction is the hydrolysis of zinc oxide to its hydroxide (Figure 13-18).
In formulations that do not contain water in the paste, the setting
of the material is retarded until the mixed paste encounters moisture in the patient’s mouth. In any case, water provides additional
acceleration. One of the chief disadvantages of the ZOE pastes is
the possible stinging or burning sensation caused by the eugenol
as it leaches out and contacts soft tissues.
Mixing of the two pastes is accomplished on an oil-impervious paper or glass mixing slab. The proper proportion of the two
pastes is generally obtained by squeezing two strips of paste of the
same length, one from each tube, onto the mixing slab. A flexible
stainless-steel spatula is typically used for the mixing procedure.
The two strips of contrasting colors are combined with the first
stroke of the spatula, and the mixing is continued for approximately 1 minute, or as directed by the manufacturer, until a uniform color is achieved.

Impression Plaster
Impression plaster is a β-calcium sulfate hemihydrate powder (to
be discussed in the following section) mixed with water at a ratio
of 100 g powder to 50 to 60 mL of water. Its fluidity makes it suitable for making impressions of soft tissues in the uncompressed
state, a characteristic of mucostatic impression material. Freshly
mixed plaster is too fluid to be retained in a stock tray; a custom
tray is needed. Preliminary impressions can be made with dental
compound, and impression plaster can be used as the wash material, which is the same concept as in the putty-wash technique.
Historically, impression plaster had been used to make impressions of hard tissue before the era of elastic impression materials.
The clinician broke the plaster impression to facilitate removal
of the impression and reassembled the fragments to form a completed impression ready for pouring the cast. A separate medium
was applied on the impression to keep the cast from merging with
the impression plaster. The impression would be fractured again
to retrieve the cast.

Impression Compound
Impression compound, also called modeling plastic, is a thermoplastic material composed of waxes, thermoplastic resins, filler,
and a coloring agent. The low thermal conductivity of these
materials indicates the need to allow an extended time to achieve
uniform softness, thorough heating, and thorough hardening to
withdraw the impression from the mouth.
Type I is a lower-fusing material for making impressions of
a single tooth or for border molding of an acrylic custom tray
ZnO

+

H2O

Zn (OH)2

CH3

HO
2
CH3O

_
CH2 CH = CH2

+ Zn (OH)2

Eugenol

CH = CH _
2

CH2

O

O

Zn
O

O

+ 2 H2O

_
CH2 CH = CH2

CH3

• Figure 13-18 Setting reaction of zinc oxide−eugenol. Arrows between zinc and oxygen of methoxy
groups indicate coordinate bonds.

CHAPTER 13

These materials are classified as a hard paste (type I) or soft paste
(type II). The final set should occur within 10 minutes for a type I
paste (hard) and 15 minutes for a type II paste (soft). When the final
set occurs, the impression can be withdrawn from the mouth. The
actual time will be shorter when setting occurs in the mouth because
humidity and temperature can accelerate the setting reaction.
A paste of a thick consistency (high viscosity) can compress
the tissues, whereas a thin, fluid material results in an impression
that captures a negative replica of the tissues in a relaxed condition
with little or no compression. In any event, the impression paste
should be homogeneous. Pastes of varying consistencies are commercially available. An advantage of a heavier-consistency material
is its increased strength.
The dimensional stability of the impression pastes is quite satisfactory. A negligible shrinkage (less than 0.1%) may occur during hardening. No significant dimensional change subsequent to
hardening should occur with high-quality commercial products.
The impressions can be preserved indefinitely without the change
in shape that can result from relaxation or other causes of warping.
This condition can be satisfied only if the tray material is dimensionally stable.

Gypsum Products
Gypsum (CaSO4•2H2O; calcium sulfate dihydrate) is a mineral
mined in various parts of the world. Gypsum products are supplied as fine hemihydrate (CaSO4•½H2O) powders that are produced by heating ground gypsum particles. After mixing with
water, the mixture reverts to gypsum. This unique property of
gypsum products has led to numerous applications throughout
history. A mixture of plaster (a gypsum product), lime, and water
was used in joining the stone blocks of ancient Egypt’s pyramids.
Gypsum and gypsum products are used widely in building construction, soil conditioning, food additives, pharmaceuticals,
medical devices, and dental applications.
The primary applications of gypsum products in dentistry include
the production of study models for oral and maxillofacial structures
and use as auxiliary materials for dental laboratories involved in the
production of dental prostheses. When refractory fillers are added,
the gypsum product becomes more heat resistant and is known as a
gypsum-based investment, capable of forming molds for the casting
of alloys (Chapter 14, Gypsum-Bonded Investments).

A

B

Auxiliary Materials

295

CRITICAL QUESTION
Calcination is a process of removing the water of crystallization from the
dihydrate. What happens if hemihydrate powder is mixed with water?

Production of Gypsum Products
Gypsum products are produced by grinding the gypsum and subjecting it to temperatures of 110 to 130 °C in open containers to
drive off part of the crystalline water (Figure 13-19). The principal
constituent of gypsum products is calcium sulfate hemihydrate.
The resulting particle is a fibrous aggregate of fine crystals with
capillary pores (Figure 13-20, A) known as plaster of Paris or dental plaster in dentistry. As the temperature is further raised, plaster becomes hexagonal anhydrite and orthorhombic anhydrite.
This process is known as calcination.
When gypsum is heated in a kettle, vat, or rotary kiln that
maintains a moist environment, a crystalline hemihydrate called
dental stone is produced (Figure 13-20, B). The powders are often
referred to as α-hemihydrate for dental stone and β-hemihydrate for
plaster of Paris.
If the calcination process occurs under pressure in a 30%
calcium chloride solution or in the presence of more than 1%
of sodium succinate, the process yields shorter and thicker
hemihydrate crystals called modified α-hemihydrate or die stone
(Figure 13-20, C). Residual calcium chloride and sodium succinate are removed by washing the powder with hot water.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the mechanism of reverting calcium sulfate hemihydrate to dihydrate?

CaSO4  2H2O Gypsum (calcium sulfate dihydrate)
110–130 °C

CaSO4  ½H2O Plaster or stone (calcium sulfate hemihydrate)
130–200 °C

Hexagonal anhydrite

CaSO4
200–1000 °C

CaSO4

Orthorhombic anhydrite

• Figure 13-19 Calcination process for gypsum.

C

• Figure 13-20 Three types of powder particles in gypsum-producing products (×400). A, Plaster of Paris
(β-hemihydrate particles); crystals are spongy and irregular in shape. B, Dental stone (α-hemihydrate);
crystals are prismatic and more regular in shape than those of plaster. C, Improved stone (modified
α-hemihydrate); the cube-shaped particles have a reduced surface area that improves the flow of the
mixture.

296

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Setting of Gypsum Products
The reaction between gypsum products and water produces solid
gypsum, and the heat evolved in the exothermic reaction is equivalent to the heat used originally for calcination. Set gypsum products probably never attain 100% conversion at room temperature.

Setting Reaction
There are three theories of gypsum setting. The colloidal theory proposes that, when mixed with water, hemihydrate enters the colloidal
state through a sol–gel mechanism. In the sol state, hemihydrate particles are hydrated to form the dihydrate state. As the water added
is consumed, the mass converts to a solid gel. The hydration theory
suggests that sulfate groups in rehydrated plaster particles unite
through hydrogen bonding with water to form the set material.
The most widely accepted theory is the dissolution–precipitation mechanism, which is based on the fact that the solubility of hemihydrate in water is greater than that of the dihydrate
near room temperature (Figure 13-21). Thus the setting reactions
occur as follows:
1. The hemihydrate particles form a fluid suspension after mixing in water.
2. The water becomes a saturated solution of Ca2+ and (SO4)2− as
the hemihydrate dissolves.
3. This saturated hemihydrate solution is a supersaturated solution with respect to the solubility of the dihydrate; precipitation of dihydrate occurs.
4. As the dihydrate precipitates, the hemihydrate continues to
dissolve. The process continues until no further dihydrate can
precipitate out of solution.
In reality, the setting is likely achieved by a combination of the
three mechanisms.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can one determine whether the hemihydrate and water mixture has set?

0.9
0.8
0.7

Solubility in percent

Hemihydrate
0.6

Gypsum
Anhydrite

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220
Temperature (°C)

• Figure 13-21 Temperature dependence of calcium sulfate solubility in
water.

Quantifying Setting Reactions
The hemihydrate and water must be mixed uniformly and maintain a workable state to facilitate pouring of a model or the casting
investment. The time from the addition of powder to the water
until mixing is completed is called the mixing time, which takes 20
to 30 seconds via mechanical mixing or at least a minute of hand
spatulation. The time from the start of mixing to the point when
the consistency is no longer acceptable for the product’s intended
purpose is the working time. Generally, a 3-minute working time
should allow sufficient time for mixing, pouring an impression
and a spare impression, and cleaning the equipment before the
gypsum becomes unworkable. As the reaction proceeds, the excess
water on the surface is taken up in forming the dihydrate, so the
mix loses surface gloss and gains strength. One must also recognize that the mixture needs to develop enough strength to resist
fracture during the removal of the model from the impression.
When the mix can resist penetration by a Gillmore needle, which
has a tip that is 2.12 mm (1/12 inch) in diameter and weighs
113.4 g (¼ lb), the time elapsed is called the initial setting time. At
this point, the mass still has no measurable compressive strength,
and the cast cannot be safely removed from the impression. The
elapsed time at which a heavier Gillmore needle, weighing 453.6 g
(1 lb) and with a tip that is 1.06 mm (1/24 inch) in diameter,
leaves only a barely perceptible mark on the surface is called the
final setting time.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can we control gypsum’s setting rate?

Control of the Setting Time
There are three factors that control setting time:
1. Solubility of the hemihydrate—Increasing solubility of the
hemihydrate achieves supersaturation of the dihydrate faster.
2. Number of nuclei of crystallization—The greater the number
of nuclei of crystallization, the faster the dihydrate crystals
will form.
3. Rate of crystal growth—Increasing or decreasing the rate of
crystal growth will accelerate or retard the setting time.
In practice, these factors have been incorporated in the formulation of the material by the manufacturer and by manipulation
techniques performed by the operator. For example, fine gypsum
particle residues from incomplete calcination or addition by the
manufacturer will shorten the setting time because of the increase
in the number of nuclei.
The amounts of water and hemihydrate should be gauged
accurately by weight. The weight (or volume) of the water divided
by the weight of the hemihydrate powder is the W/P ratio. For
example, if 100 g of dental stone is mixed with 28 mL of water,
the W/P ratio is 0.28. This ratio is an important factor in determining the physical and mechanical properties of the final gypsum product. The use of a higher W/P ratio decreases the number
of nuclei per unit volume, with a longer setting time.
During mixing, dihydrate crystals form and are broken into
fine particles by the spatulation. These particles become nuclei
of crystallization. Therefore, within practical limits, a longer and
more rapid mixing of the gypsum will result in a shorter setting
time.
Usually an increase in water temperature leads to an acceleration of a chemical setting reaction. Figure 13-21 shows that the
difference in solubility between hemihydrate and gypsum becomes
smaller with increasing temperature, and this condition lowers the

CHAPTER 13

Molecular mass (g)
Density (g/cm3)
Equivalent volume (cm3)

(CaSO4)2 • H2O + 3H2O
54.05
290.28
1.00
2.75
54.21
105.56

Auxiliary Materials

297

2 CaSO4 • 2 H2O
344.33
2.32
148.41

(105.56 + 54.21) – 148.41 × 100% = 7.11%
(105.56 + 54.21)

• Figure 13-22 Volume changes from conversion of calcium sulfate hemihydrate to dihydrate.
driving force for forming the dihydrate; a temperature increase
also results in a slower setting reaction. The decreased driving force
causes the effect of temperature on the setting time to be erratic
and to vary from one material to another.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the recommended methods to accelerate or retard the setting time
for a given gypsum-forming product?

Modifiers for Controlling Setting Time
Chemical modifiers have been used extensively to increase or
decrease the setting time of gypsum products; they are called
retarders and accelerators, respectively. The manufacturers use both
types of compounds to formulate gypsum products with specific
setting times.
It has been observed that strong inorganic acids and their salts
with strong or weak bases are accelerators. The most commonly
used accelerator is potassium sulfate, which is particularly effective in concentrations up to 2%. Slurry water flowing out from a
model trimmer contains numerous fine gypsum particles that act
as nuclei of crystallization and are an effective accelerator. Stirring
the slurry water before use is important to disperse these fine gypsum particles. Increasing the time or the speed of mixing can create more nuclei by crushing the developing dihydrate crystals into
smaller particles, thereby accelerating the setting of the mix. At a
concentration of 2% of the hemihydrate, sodium chloride is an
accelerator. Sodium sulfate has its maximum acceleration effect at
approximately 3.4%. Several inorganic salts play dual roles in the
setting kinetics of dihydrate, which are accelerators at low concentration and retarders at higher concentration. For example, borax,
a known retarder for gypsum setting, has also been shown to promote the growth of dihydrate crystals, but only at a concentration
lower than 0.2 mM (about 0.08 g/L).
One should recognize that significant acceleration of the reaction time could compromise the optimal flow characteristics of
the material. The manufacturer has added accelerators, retarders,
and other controlling agents, so adding other ingredients that may
counteract the effects of components that are already incorporated
into the product is not wise. Therefore one should select a product
from the manufacturer’s catalog with the specific setting time that
the operator needs.

CRITICAL QUESTION
When a mixture of hemihydrate and water sets, the resulting object is always
porous. Why?

Setting Expansion
Regardless of the type of gypsum product selected, an expansion
of the mass can be detected during the formation dihydrate. The
observed linear expansion may be as low as 0.06% or as high as

0.5%. This phenomenon is contrary to what is expected when
hemihydrate reverts to the denser dihydrate form. If equivalent
volumes of the hemihydrate, water, and the reaction product
(dihydrate) are compared, the volume of the dihydrate formed
will be 7.11% less than the equivalent combined volumes of the
hemihydrate and water (Figure 13-22). The phenomenon of setting expansion can be explained based on crystallization.

Mechanism of Setting Expansion
The crystallization of dihydrates can be pictured as an outgrowth
of crystals from nuclei of crystallization. Crystals growing from
the nuclei can intermesh with and obstruct the growth of adjacent crystals. When the process repeats itself with thousands of
the crystals during growth, an outward stress or thrust results in
an expansion of the entire mass. Thus a setting expansion can take
place even though the true volume of the crystals alone may be less
than calculated. Therefore the structure immediately after setting
is composed of interlocking crystals, between which are micropores and pores containing the excess water required for mixing.
On drying, the excess water is lost, resulting in a porous structure.
Figure 13-23 shows the dimensional change during the setting of a gypsum product. The mixture exhibits an initial contraction followed by an expansion and smaller contraction. The
initial contraction is caused by the surface tension of water pulling
the particles closer. When the mixture is poured into an impression, the gypsum may continue contracting during the induction
period. That contraction is of no concern because the mixture still
flows and adapts to the impression. Only when the mixture is
sufficiently rigid (after the initial set) will the force of expansion
produce a visible setting expansion of the cast.
It is important to note that only the setting expansion that
occurs after the initial set is of interest. When enough crystals
have formed to produce the outward thrust by impingement, setting expansion follows. The onset of the initial setting occurs at
approximately the minimal point of the curve, the point at which
expansion begins. Because the contraction prior to the initial setting occurs at the free surface, the final dimension of the cast relative to that of the impression mold includes a setting expansion
of approximately 0.12%, according to Figure 13-23. Naturally,
the quantities of setting expansion vary among different gypsum
products.
Control of Setting Expansion
As can be noted from the results presented in Table 13-9, a lower
W/P ratio and a longer mixing time will increase the setting
expansion. Each of these factors increases the nuclei density. The
effect of the W/P ratio on the setting expansion is to be expected
on theoretical grounds. At higher W/P ratios, fewer nuclei of crystallization per unit volume are present compared with the greater
density of nuclei in thicker mixes. Because it can be assumed that
the space between the nuclei is greater in such a case, it follows
that there is less growth interaction of the dihydrate crystals and
less outward thrust. However, the most effective method by which

298

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

(I)

Setting expansion (%)

0.1

(II)

(III)

(IV)

(V)

Normal setting conditions (N)

0.0
-0.1
-0.2

Hygroscopic setting conditions (H)

-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6
0

10

20

30
Time (min)

40

50

60

e

e

e

e
H

• Figure 13-23 Dimensional changes that occur during the setting of a
gypsum product. The arrow indicates the initial set at approximately the
lowest point of the curve.

e

t

Initial mix

H
N

t

H
N

H
t

Initial crystal Solid phase
growth
contact

N

N
t

t

Expansion

Termination

Expansion vs. time curve

TABLE 13-9 Effect of Water/Powder (W/P) Ratio and

Mixing Time on Setting Expansion of
Plaster of Paris
W/P Ratio

Mixing Time (min)

Setting Expansion (%)

0.45

0.6

0.41

0.45

1.0

0.51

0.60

1.0

0.29

0.60

2.0

0.41

0.80

1.0

0.24

From Gibson CS, Johnson RN: Investigations of the setting of plaster of Paris, J Soc
Chem Ind 51(1):25T, 1932.

to control setting expansion is through the addition of chemicals
by the manufacturer.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Thus far, the setting of plaster or stone has occurred in air. What would
happen if the hemihydrate and water mixture could set underwater? Keep
in mind that the solubilities of hemihydrate and dihydrate are very low in
water, and one should not be concerned that the mixture will dissolve without
vigorous stirring.

Hygroscopic Setting Expansion
Imagine that the initial mix is represented in the top row of
Figure 13-24 (stage I) by the three round particles of hemihydrate surrounded by water. Under normal setting conditions, the
crystals of the dihydrate begin to form on the nuclei. The water
around the particles is reduced by hydration, and these particles
are drawn more closely together because the surface tension of
the water keeps the water surface area at a minimum (stage II).
As the crystals of dihydrate grow, they contact each other, and
the water around the particles again decreases (stage III). Further
dihydrate growth consumes more water and should draw the crystals together as before, but the outward thrust of the growing crystals opposes this contraction (stage IV). Eventually, the crystals
become intermeshed and entangled (stage V).

• Figure 13-24 Diagrammatic representation of the setting expansion of
gypsum products. In the top row, the crystal growth is inhibited by the
surface tension of water surrounding the growing crystals. In the middle
row, the gypsum mixture (the area surrounded by the dashed circle) is
immersed in water during setting (represented by the larger solid circle);
the immersion water provides more room for longer crystal growth. The
bottom row shows the expansion (e) over time (t) for hygroscopic setting
expansion (H) and normal setting expansion (N). (Adapted from Mahler
DB, Ady AB: An explanation for the hygroscopic setting expansion of dental gypsum products, J Dent Res 39:378–379, 1960.)

Stage I of the middle row (hygroscopic setting conditions)
of Figure 13-24 shows an identical mixture of hemihydrate
(the area delineated by the dashed circle) underwater (the area
outside of the dashed circle). The hydration of hemihydrate
particles here would proceed as usual. Because they are surrounded by a body of water, the surface tension of water will
not be pulling or pushing these growing crystals (stage II).
As the dihydrate crystals continue to grow and contact each
other, no reduction in the distance between crystals is expected
(stage III). This means that the crystals will grow much more
freely during the early stages (stage IV) before the intermeshing finally prevents further expansion (stage V). Consequently,
the observed setting expansion that occurs when the gypsum
product sets underwater is greater than that which occurs during setting in air.
To distinguish between the two setting conditions, the setting
expansion without water immersion is usually called normal setting expansion (N in the bottom row of Figure 13-24), whereas
the expansion that occurs underwater is known as hygroscopic
setting expansion (H in the bottom row of Figure 13-24).
The hygroscopic expansion obtained during the setting of dental stone or plaster is about twice that of the normal setting expansion. This property has been used in the formulation of investment
materials to compensate for the casting shrinkage. More discussion on the hygroscopic expansion of investment materials is presented in Chapter 14, Hygroscopic Setting Expansion.
Note that hygroscopy means the ability of a substance to
attract water molecules from the surrounding environment
through either absorption or adsorption. The hygroscopic setting expansion described here is not the result of absorption
or adsorption. Therefore the term hygroscopic setting expansion

CHAPTER 13

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the presence of water in the pores of set gypsum affect the
strength of the gypsum object?

Strength of Set Gypsum Products
The strength of set gypsum products as a brittle material is generally expressed in terms of compressive strength.

Effect of Water Content
The free water content of the set product affects product
strength. For this reason, two strength properties of gypsum
are reported: the wet strength (also known as green strength)
and the dry strength. The wet strength is the strength that is
determined when water in excess of that required for hydration
of the hemihydrate remains in the test specimen. When such
excess water is removed by drying, the strength obtained is the
dry strength. The dry strength may be two or more times as high
as the wet strength.
The effect of drying period on the compressive strength of set
plaster is shown in Table 13-10. Note the relatively slight gain in
strength that occurred after 8 hours of drying and the loss of water.
Between an 8-hour and a 24-hour drying period, only 0.6% of the
excess water was lost, yet the strength doubled. A similar change
in surface hardness takes place during the drying process. Keep in
mind that the excess water in the set gypsum products is saturated
with Ca2+ and SO42−. As the last trace of water is lost, fine crystals
of gypsum precipitate serve as anchors between the larger crystals.
Thus, if excess water is reconstituted by immersion or absorption,
these small crystals are the first to dissolve, and the reinforcing
anchors are lost.
Microwave irradiation has been used to speed up the drying
and disinfection of gypsum casts. The influence on the strength of
the gypsum cast, however, is inconclusive. In general, microwave
irradiation, a timesaving procedure, may be associated with some
dimensional changes. The time needed varies with the microwave
oven setting and the type of cast being dried.
TABLE 13-10 Effect of Drying Period on the

Strength of Plaster of Paris
Compressive Strength
(MPa)

Weight Loss (%)

2

9.6

5.1

4

11.7

11.9

8

11.7

17.4

16

13.0

—

24

23.3

18.0

48

23.3

18.0

Drying Period (h)

72

23.3

—

From Gibson CS, Johnson RN: Investigations of setting of plaster of Paris, J Soc Chem
Ind 51(1):25–38, 1932.

299

Effect of Water/Powder Ratio
As previously noted, the set plaster or stone is porous, and the
greater the W/P ratio, the greater the porosity. As might be expected
on such a basis, the greater is the W/P ratio, the less is the strength
of the set material, as shown by the data in Table 13-11, because
fewer dihydrate crystals are available per unit volume.
Figure 13-25 is a plot of the strength as a function of the W/P
ratio for the five different types of gypsum products used in dentistry (discussed later). The figure includes data from many of the
products on the market that meet ANSI/ADA Specification No. 25
or ISO 6873 for dental gypsum products (Table 13-12). The
compression test was conducted 1 hour after the start of mixing;
therefore the values obtained are wet strength of the materials
tested. Although the W/P ratio varies for the brand of plaster or
stone, the typical recommended ranges of W/P ratios are shown in
Table 13-12 for the five types of gypsum products.

TABLE 13-11 Effect of the Water/Powder (W/P) Ratio

and Mixing Time on the Strength of
Plaster of Paris
Mixing Time (min)

Compressive Strength
(MPa)

0.45

0.5

23.4

0.45

1.0

26.2

0.60

1.0

17.9

0.60

2.0

13.8

0.80

1.0

11.0

W/P Ratio

From Gibson CS, Johnson RN: Investigations of setting of plaster of Paris, J Soc Chem
Ind 51(1):25T, 1932.

70
Type V
60
Compressive strength (MPa)

of gypsum products is technically incorrect. Nonetheless, this
term is retained in explanations of the setting expansion of gypsum.

Auxiliary Materials

Conditions: wet, 1 hour,
hand mixed

50

ADA Specification no. 25

40
Type III
Type IV

30

Type II
20
10

Type I

0
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

W/P ratio

• Figure 13-25 One-hour compressive strength as a function of water/
powder (W/P) ratio for five types of gypsum products. ADA, American
Dental Association.

300

PA RT I V

TABLE 13-12

Fabrication of Prostheses

Typical W/P Ratios and Properties Requirements of Gypsum Products

Type

W/P Ratio

Setting Time* (min)

2-h Setting
Expansion* (%)

1-h Compressive
Strength† (MPa)

I. Plaster, impression

0.50–0.75

2.5–5.0

0.0–0.15

4.0§–8.0†

II. Plaster, model

0.45–0.50

TBD

0.0–0.30

9.0§

III. Dental stone

0.28–0.30

TBD

0.0–0.20

20.0§

IV. Dental stone, high strength

0.22–0.24

TBD

0.0–0.15

35.0§

V. Dental stone, high strength,
high expansion

0.18–0.22

TBD

0.16–0.30

35.0§

TBD—The setting time should be within 20% of the value claimed by manufacturer.
*Property requirements specified in ANSI/ADA Specification No. 25 and ISO 6873:2013.
§

Minimum strength value.

†

Maximum strength value.

Effect of Manipulation and Additives
As shown in Table 13-11, the mixing time also affects the strength
of the plaster. In general, an increase in mixing time increases the
strength to a limit. If the mixture is overmixed, the gypsum crystals will be broken up, and the final product will hold less crystalline interlocking structure.
The addition of an accelerator or retarder lowers both the wet
strength and the dry strength of the gypsum product. Such a
decrease in strength can be partially attributed to the salt added
as an adulterant and to the reduction in intercrystalline cohesion.
When relatively pure hemihydrate is mixed with minimal
amounts of water, the working time is short, and the setting expansion is unduly high. However, as just noted, dental gypsum products contain additives that reduce the setting expansion, increase
the working time, and provide a rapid final set. The addition of
more chemicals can upset the delicate balance of these properties. Thus, if a change is desired in the setting time, this should
be controlled by modest alterations in the W/P ratio and/or the
spatulation time.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which properties are used to classify the various types of gypsum products?

Types of Gypsum Products
ANSI/ADA Specification No. 25 classifies five types of gypsum products and gives the property requirements for each type (Table 13-12).
Some gypsum materials are formulated for special purposes, such
as for pouring orthodontic casts or attaching casts to an articulator. The criterion for selecting any gypsum product depends on the
intended use and the physical properties necessary for that particular use.

Impression Plaster (Type I)
These impression materials are composed of plaster of Paris to
which modifiers have been added to regulate the setting time and
setting expansion. Impression plaster is now rarely used for making dental impressions because plaster has been replaced by less
rigid materials such as the hydrocolloids and elastomers. Descriptions of the impression plaster and applications were given earlier.

Model Plaster (Type II)
Model plaster or laboratory type II plaster is now used principally
to fill a flask used in denture construction when setting expansion is not critical and the strength is adequate according to the
limits cited in the ADA specification or ISO standard. It is usually
marketed in the natural white color, thus contrasting with stones,
which are generally colored.
Dental Stone (Type III)
Type III stone has a minimal 1-hour compressive strength of
20.0 MPa. It is intended for the construction of casts in the fabrication of full dentures to fit soft tissues. For this application, a
slight setting expansion can be tolerated in casts that reproduce
soft tissues, but not when teeth are involved. Type III stones are
preferred for casts used to process dentures because the stone has
enough strength for this purpose but low enough strength for
separating the denture from the cast.
There are at least two methods for the construction of the cast.
One method is to construct a mold by wrapping soft flat wax strips
around the impression so that they extend approximately 12 mm
beyond the tissue side of the impression. This process is called boxing,
which forms the base of the cast. The mixture of stone and water is
then poured into the impression under vibration. Another method
is to fill the impression first as described but without wrapping. The
remainder of the stone–water mixture is poured on a glass plate. The
filled impression is then inverted over a mound of stone, and the base
is shaped with the spatula before the stone sets. Such a procedure is
not indicated if the impression can easily be deformed or if the stone
is “runny.” The cast should not be separated from the impression
until the stone has hardened. The minimal time allowed for setting
varies from 45 to 60 minutes, depending on the rate of setting of the
stone or plaster and the type of impression material used.
Dental Stone, High Strength (Type IV)
The principal requisites for a die material are strength, hardness,
and minimal setting expansion. To obtain these properties, modified α-hemihydrate, also called die stone, is used.
A hard surface is necessary for a die stone because the tooth
preparation is covered with wax and carved flush with the margins of the die. A sharp instrument is used for this purpose; therefore the stone must be resistant to abrasion. Gypsum hardening

CHAPTER 13

solutions, silver plating, coating with cyanoacrylate adhesive, and
other methods of increasing the abrasion resistance are discussed
in Chapter 14, Preparation of the Master Die. It is fortunate that
the surface hardness increases more rapidly than the compressive strength because the surface dries more rapidly. This is a real
advantage in that the surface resists abrasion, whereas the core of
the die is tough and less subject to accidental breakage. The average dry surface hardness of the type IV stones is approximately 92
(Rockwell hardness), and that of type III stone is 82. Even though
the surface of the type IV stone is harder, care should be taken
when the pattern is being carved.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Under what conditions might a type V dental stone be used?

Dental Stone, High Strength, High Expansion (Type V)
This gypsum product exhibits an even higher compressive strength
than the type IV dental stone. The improved strength is attained
by lowering the W/P ratio even further than that used for type IV
stone. In addition, the setting expansion has been increased from
a maximum of 0.16% to 0.30% (Table 13-12). The rationale for
increasing the setting expansion is the use of base metals that have a
greater casting shrinkage than do the traditional noble-metal alloys
(Chapter 9, Alternative Technologies for Fabricating Prostheses).
Thus higher expansion is required in the stone die to aid in compensating for the alloy solidification shrinkage. The use of a type V
stone may also be indicated when the expansion achieved during
the fabrication of cast crowns is inadequate. One should avoid the
use of type V stones for producing dies for inlays and onlays because
the higher expansion may lead to an unacceptably tight fit.
Special Gypsum Products
The orthodontist prefers a white stone or plaster for study models and may treat the surface with soap to acquire sheen. These
products generally have a longer working time that reduces void
formation and facilitates trimming.
Mounting casts to articulators requires a gypsum product, which
is referred to as “mounting” stone or plaster. These products are fast
setting and exhibit low setting expansion. In addition, they have a
sufficiently low strength, permitting easy trimming and facilitating
separation of casts from the articulator mounting plates.
Some products are designed to save time. One type is extremely
fast setting and is ready to use in 5 minutes, but it has little working time. Another product changes color to indicate when it is
ready for use. In addition, one specialty product contains a small
amount of plastic or resin to reduce brittleness and improve resistance to abrasion during the carving of wax patterns.

Manipulation of Gypsum Products
In practice, clinicians and technicians must not only produce a
cast using a gypsum-producing material, but they must also store
the powder properly and maintain the cast in the best condition
for subsequent procedures.

Care of Gypsum Products
If the relative humidity of the surroundings exceeds 70%, the
plaster absorbs sufficient moisture from the air to start a setting
reaction. The initial hydration probably produces a few dihydrate crystals on the surface of the exposed hemihydrate particles.

Auxiliary Materials

301

These dihydrate crystals can act as nuclei of crystallization and
accelerate the setting when the powder is mixed with water. If the
hydration continues during storage, hemihydrate crystals could
become completely covered with dihydrate crystals. Under these
conditions, the water penetrates the dihydrate coating with difficulty, and the setting time is prolonged. The best means of storage
is to seal the product in a moisture-proof metal container.

Proportioning
The measurement should be made with a graduated cylinder for
water by volume and a weighing balance for the weight of powder.
Measurement of powder by volume is not reliable because of nonuniform powder packing. Preweighed envelopes are very popular
because they promote accuracy, reduce waste, and save time.
Mixing and Pouring
If mixing is performed by hand, the bowl should be parabolic in
shape, smooth, and resistant to abrasion. The spatula should have
a stiff blade and a handle that is convenient to hold. A measured
amount of water is placed in the bowl first, followed by sifting
the weighed powder into the water as initial hand mixing is performed. The mixture is then vigorously stirred, with periodic wiping of the inside of the bowl with the spatula to ensure wetting of
all the powder and breaking up of any agglomerates or lumps. The
mixing should continue until a smooth mix is obtained, usually
within a minute. A longer spatulation time drastically reduces the
working time. The use of a vibrator of high frequency and low
amplitude to reduce air entrapment is essential before pouring.
The preferred method of mixing is to use a mechanical mixer
under vacuum. First, the measured water is added to the bowl, followed by gradual addition of the preweighed powder. The powder
is incorporated during approximately 15 seconds of mixing with
a hand spatula, followed by 20 to 30 seconds of mechanical mixing under vacuum. The strength and hardness obtained from such
vacuum mixing usually exceed that obtained by hand mixing.
Before pouring, the mixing bowl with the dental stone mixture
should be vibrated to eliminate more entrapped air and set aside. The
impression tray is held in one hand against the vibrator. The surface
of the impression should be free of excess water. When tooth preparations are involved, a small spatula about the size of the preparation
may be used to deliver enough stone to fill all preparations. The speed
of the vibrator should be adjusted high enough to make the stone
flow slowly into the space. After the preparation and the anterior
teeth are filled, more dental stone can be added from one open end of
the impression (e.g., in the last molar of a full-arch impression). The
impression may be tilted to facilitate the movement of the stone into
the tooth depression. Additional stone is added behind the moving
front to promote the flow of stone and to ensure that the previously
filled area does not lose much of its volume. Once the tooth depressions are filled, larger amounts of dental stone can be added under
light vibration to fill the remaining impression up to the mucobuccal
fold or rim of the boxed area around the impression tray. The impression is then briefly placed on the vibrator for a few seconds to distribute the stone evenly across the impression.
If the inversion method is used, a mound of stone about 20 mm
high is made on a flat surface, such as a glass plate, with the remainder of the mixture or with a new mix using a lower W/P ratio.
The stone in the filled impression should exhibit the initial set but
not the final set before the impression is then inverted over the
mound of stone. The base is shaped with the spatula, and the entire
assembly is left undisturbed until the material has set completely.
The dental stone model is then separated from the impression.

302

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

CRITICAL QUESTION
What storage conditions are necessary to maintain the dimensional accuracy
of a gypsum cast?

Care of the Cast
The cast dimensions should be relatively constant under ordinary
conditions of room temperature and humidity. However, soaking
casts in water may be necessary in preparation for other procedures. A study has reported that a stone cast immersed in a container under running water will lose approximately 0.1% of the
cast’s linear dimension for every 20 minutes of immersion. Therefore the safest method for soaking the cast is to place the cast in
a water bath with gypsum debris remaining on the bottom of the
container to provide a saturated solution of calcium sulfate.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What procedure should be followed if it is uncertain whether the impression
or the gypsum cast has been disinfected?

Infection Control
Concern over possible cross-contamination of dental office personnel
by microorganisms, including hepatitis B virus and human immunodeficiency virus, via dental impressions has prompted study of the
effect of spray- and immersion-disinfecting techniques on impression
materials. The effect of such agents on the surface quality and accuracy of the resulting gypsum casts is an important consideration.
If an impression has not been disinfected or if the laboratory had
no assurance that an appropriate disinfection protocol was followed,
disinfecting the stone cast will be necessary. Disinfection solutions
can be used that do not adversely affect the quality of the gypsum
cast. Alternatively, disinfectants can either be incorporated in the
powder or dissolved in the mixing water. The addition of a disinfectant in the gypsum products would undoubtedly influence some of
the properties of certain products, such as strength, setting expansion, and setting time. The precise effect depends on the types of
gypsum and antimicrobial agents used. Nonetheless, the disinfected
stones apparently compare favorably with nondisinfected controls.
The same microwave irradiation used in drying gypsum casts
has also been evaluated in infection control. One study showed
that a 5-minute irradiation at 900 W reduced microorganism
counts (cfu/mL), with a median log value of 6 to median counts
(cfu/mL) of zero. Data on the effectiveness of microwave irradiation on different microorganism species, based on the power
setting, the duration needed, and the influence of prolonged irradiation on the properties of the gypsum cast, are not available.
The widespread availability of a spectrum of disinfected dental
stone casts (type III to type V) with proven efficacy and unimpaired physical properties will undoubtedly strengthen the barrier
system of infection control in the dental laboratory.

Dental Waxes
Wax is a thermoplastic polymer that can be molded with or without a slightly elevated temperature and retain the new shape when
cooled to room temperature. The fabrication of fixed and removable dental protheses uses various forms of wax during clinical
procedures or processing in the laboratory. Clinical products
include bite registration wax, disclosing wax (pressure-indicating
paste), utility waxes for altering and adapting impression trays,
and waxes for making wax patterns. Laboratory products include

boxing wax, baseplate wax, sticky wax, beading wax, utility wax,
and waxes for making pattern prostheses on patients’ models.
Waxes for dental procedures are a blend of natural and synthetic waxes. Natural waxes are taken from plants, insects, animals, or minerals (including petroleum); synthetic waxes are
made by the synthesis of polymers or the modification of natural
waxes. Mineral-based waxes are mostly mixtures of hydrocarbons,
whereas waxes from plants, insects, and animals contain hydrocarbons with ester and some with alcohol or acid. Synthetic waxes
are typically composed of hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, and chlorine. Synthetic waxes are more uniform than natural waxes in their
structure and more homogeneous in composition.

Components of Dental Waxes
Blending natural and synthetic waxes along with other additives creates unique working characteristics for the intended applications. For
example, coloring agents are added to provide a contrast of wax patterns against the hues of teeth, dies, and model surfaces. Ivory-colored
wax is useful for aesthetic case presentations to patients. Fillers can be
added to control expansion and shrinkage of the wax product. Some
major components of dental waxes are discussed next.
Paraffin, derived from fractions of petroleum, is a colorless or
white, somewhat translucent hard wax with a wide range of melting or softening temperatures. Paraffin wax flakes when trimmed
and does not produce a smooth, glossy surface. Microcrystalline
wax, derived from heavier petroleum fractions, has a higher melting point, crystallizes in small plates, and is tougher and more flexible than paraffn waxes. Gum dammar, a natural resin, improves the
smoothness in the molding of paraffin-based wax and renders the
wax resistant to cracking and flaking. Carnauba wax, a very hard
wax with an agreeable odor from carnauba palm trees, has a relatively high melting point that decreases the flow of the paraffin at
mouth temperature and improves the glossiness of the wax surface.
Certain synthetic waxes can be used in place of carnauba wax.
They include a nitrogen derivative of the higher fatty acids or esters of
acids derived from Montan wax. Candelilla wax is a plant-based wax
that has the same effect as carnauba wax with a lower melting point.
Ceresin is extracted from ozokerite, a waxy mineral mixture with a
somewhat unpleasant odor. Ceresin may replace part of the paraffin
to modify the toughness and carving characteristics of the wax.

Types of Dental Waxes
Dental waxes can be classified into one of three types by the application: pattern wax, processing wax, and impression wax. In this section,
we discuss relevant properties critical to the intended applications.

Pattern Wax
Pattern waxes are used to form the outline of a prosthesis, which
is to be constructed of a more durable material such as cast alloys,
hot-isostatically pressed ceramics, or compression molded resins.
They include inlay wax, casting wax, and baseplate wax.
Inlay waxes may be softened over a flame or in water at 54 to
60 °C to enable their flow in the liquid state and their adaptation to the prepared tooth (direct technique that is no longer common) or die (indirect technique). Type I is a direct technique wax,
and type II is an indirect technique wax (ANSI/ADA Specification
No. 4 [1983]). Before the adaptation of the pattern wax within a
tooth or a die, a separating medium must be used to ensure the
complete separation of the wax pattern without distortion.
Dipping wax, which is kept molten during the process, can be
used to facilitate the wax-pattern preparation. A well-lubricated die is

CHAPTER 13

immersed in this wax briefly, and the wax coating is uniform in thickness when cooled to room temperature. After the pattern is removed
from the prepared cavity, the pattern is encased in a gypsum- or phosphate-based material or other type of refractory material known as
an investment. The role of the investment in obtaining a casting that
fits the preparation is discussed in Chapter 14, Investment Materials.
Because of the extremely high thermal expansion coefficient
value compared with those for other dental materials, the type I
inlay wax will shrink appreciably as it is cooled to room temperature. A pattern made by the indirect method may not shrink
as much, although the amount depends on whether the pattern
has reached room temperature before it is removed from the die.
Casting waxes serve the same purpose as inlay wax but are used
to make patterns for the metallic framework of removable partial
dentures and other similar structures that include sculpting and
buildup. They come in sheets, pearls, and a variety of ready-made
forms, such as round, half-round, and half-pear-shaped rods and
wires of various gauges. Most casting waxes contain no synthetic
material and have more high-molecular-weight molecules; this
allows the wax to have excellent sculpting characteristics, quick
cooling down, and the ability to remain opaque even in the molten state to lend better control during wax-up.
Baseplate wax is used to establish the initial arch form in the
construction of complete dentures. Supplied in 1- to 2-mm-thick
red or pink sheets, they come in three types for specific applications. Type I, a soft wax, is used for building contours and veneers.
Type II, a medium wax, is designed for pattern production in
the mouth in normal climatic conditions. Type III, a hard wax,
is used for trial fitting in the mouth in tropical climates (ANSI/
ADA Specification No. 24 [1991: Reaffirmed 2003]). The classifications of baseplate wax described in ISO 15854:2021 are Type 2/
Class 1: Soft, Type 2/Class 2: Hard, and Type 2/Class 3: Extra
hard. Because residual stress is present within the wax from contouring and manipulating the wax, the finished denture pattern
should be flasked as soon as possible after the completion of all
adjustments and manipulations.

Processing Wax
The role of processing waxes is primarily in simplifying the dental
procedures for constructing a variety of devices and appliances, in
the clinics or in the laboratory.
Utility wax is a moldable wax that can adhere to various dry surfaces when pressed on. This wax transforms a standard perforated
impression tray for use with hydrocolloids into a more desirable
contour and protects soft tissue from the periphery to extend or
post dam impression trays. Utility wax can be used to repair small
imperfections in wax patterns, to fill holes, or to apply sprues to
sprue bases (Chapter 14, Sprue Position and Attachment).
Sticky wax is an orange-colored wax in the form of stick, which
is tacky when melted but firm and brittle when cooled. Sticky
waxes are used to temporarily fasten gypsum model components,
join and temporarily stabilize the components of a bridge before
soldering, or attach pieces of a broken denture prior to a repair.
Boxing wax is intended for enclosing an impression before a
stone cast is poured. Typically provided in pink-colored flat sheets,
this wax is relatively soft and pliable and can easily be pressed to
the desired contour around the perimeter of an impression and
self-sealed at the overlapped area with firm pressure.
Impression Wax
The impression waxes, also referred to as bite waxes or corrective
waxes, tend to distort if they are withdrawn from undercut areas.
Thus they are limited to use in edentulous sites of the mouth or in

Auxiliary Materials

303

occlusal surface areas. Nonetheless, they have enough body to register the detail of soft tissues, and they are rigid at room temperature.

Properties of Wax
Of the three types of waxes discussed, the sensitivity of the wax
to the surrounding environment and the intrinsic properties is
critical to the application of pattern waxes. Therefore the properties discussed in this section address the requirements of pattern
waxes. The desired properties of pattern waxes are as follows:
1. The wax should be uniform when softened.
2. The color should contrast with die materials or prepared teeth
to facilitate proper finishing of the margins.
3. The wax should not fragment into flakes or similar surface
particles during carving after cooling.
4. The wax must not be pulled away by the instrument or chip
during carving.
5. During the burnout phase, the wax must burn completely by
oxidizing residual carbon to volatile gases. Ideally, the wax should
not leave a solid residue that amounts to more than 0.10% of the
original weight of the specimen after the burnout phase.

Flow of Dental Wax
Flow, by definition, is a measure of the degree of permanent deformation of the material at a given temperature below the melting temperature of the wax. We use type I inlay wax to discuss the significance of
flow property. When a wax pattern is to be made with type I inlay wax,
the wax must have a relatively high flow a few degrees above mouth
temperature so that the wax is workable but not uncomfortably warm
when placed in the mouth of the patient. At mouth temperature, the
same wax must have essentially no flow to minimize the possibility
of distortion of the pattern during removal from the tooth preparation. The temperature–time cooling curve of a paraffin-based inlay
wax (Figure 13-26) features two inflections; the upper one indicates
hardening of the wax below 65 °C and becoming solid below around
48 °C. They do not show the precise melting range of the wax but
indicate the successive solidification of progressively lower-molecularweight fractions. This condition promotes moldability of the wax.
Flow is measured by subjecting cylindrical specimens to a
designated load at the stated temperature and measuring the percentage of reduction in height. Requirements for the flow properties of inlay waxes at specific temperatures are summarized in
Table 13-13. The low flow value at 37 °C permits carving and
removal of the pattern from the prepared cavity at mouth temperature without distortion. A flow range of 70% to 90% for type
I and type II inlay waxes at 45 °C facilitates flow into all areas in
the preparation and reproduction of details on the wax pattern.
Thermal Properties of Dental Waxes
Waxes are softened with heat, forced on the prepared tooth or
the die, and cooled. The thermal conductivity of the waxes is low,
and sufficient time must be allowed both to heat them uniformly
throughout and to cool them to body or room temperature, as
with impression compounds. Another thermal characteristic
of wax is its high coefficient of thermal expansion. As shown in
Figure 13-27, the inlay wax may expand as much as 0.7% with
a 20 °C increase in temperature or contract as much as 0.35%
when it is cooled from 37 to 25 °C. The effect of low thermal
conductivity and high thermal contraction is less significant when
the wax is used in the indirect technique because the pattern is not
subjected to a change from mouth to room temperature.
The thermal dimensional change may be affected by the previous manipulation of the wax. Figure 13-27 shows the thermal

304

PA RT I V

TABLE 13-13

Fabrication of Prostheses

Requirements for Inlay Casting Wax Flow (%)
Type of Wax

ANSI/ADA Spec. No. 4
(1983; Reaffirmed
2003)

T = 30 °C

T = 37 °C

ISO 15854:2021

Max.

Max.

Min.

Max.

Min.

Max.

Type I

Type 1, Class 2

—

1.0

—

20.0

70.0

90.0

Type II

Type 1, Class 1

1.0

—

50.0

—

70.0

90.0

T = 45 °C

expansion of two wax specimens as a function of temperature;
curve A is the specimen that has previously cooled under pressure,
whereas curve B is the specimen that cooled free of pressure. Both
curves show a greater expansion rate above 35 °C. Recall from the
discussion in Chapter 2, Thermal Properties, that the temperature where this characteristic change occurs is known as the glasstransition temperature (Figure 2-28). The deviation between the
two curves occurs because specimen A had yielded more crystalline structure under pressure that exhibits a greater rate of expansion while passing through the glass-transition zone.

65

60

55
Temperature (°C)

T = 40 °C

50

CRITICAL QUESTION
45

How can one best minimize the potential distortion effects associated with
elastic memory and temperature changes?

40

35

30
0

10

20

30

40

Time (min)

• Figure 13-26 Time–temperature cooling curve for type I inlay wax.

0.7

A

Thermal expansion (%)

0.6
0.5
B

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Mechanical Properties
The weak intermolecular bonds of dental waxes that afford the
dental profession all the ease of manipulation and convenience
of the intended applications also yield a material of low elastic
modulus and associated mechanical properties that are sensitive to
temperature compared with those of other dental materials. This
is a major limitation of wax.
Residual Stress and Wax Distortion
Distortion of wax patterns can occur when forming and removing the pattern from a tooth or die. Distortion of a wax pattern
can result from occluded air in the pattern, physical deformation
(during molding, carving, or removal), release of stresses “trapped”
during previous cooling, excessive storage time, and extreme temperature changes during storage.
Because of low thermal conductivity, the outer layer of the wax
cools first while the core remains in a liquid state and continues
to contract. When the core finally cools to a solid, the contraction
process is constrained by the already-solid external layers, resulting
in residual stress. A newly made wax pattern not retained on the
die tends to change its shape over time, a sign of stress relieving
to reach a state of dimensional stability. Thus it is important that
the wax pattern be retained on the die for several hours to avoid
distortion and ensure that equilibrium conditions are established.
A casting will fit most accurately when the pattern is invested
immediately after its removal from the preparation or the die. Any
delay in investing the pattern can lead to a distortion of its form
because of stress-relaxation effects.

Manipulation of Inlay Wax

0
20

25

30

35

40

Temperature (°C)

• Figure 13-27 Thermal expansion of inlay wax. Curve A represents the
thermal expansion when the wax was held under pressure while it was
cooling from the liquid state. When the same wax is cooled without pressure and heated again, the behavior shown by curve B occurs.

To preserve their properties, dental waxes must be warmed homogeneously but not over a prolonged time. Dry heat is preferred to the
use of a water bath to avoid incorporating water. To fabricate indirect
patterns on a die, the die should be lubricated. The melted wax may
be added in layers with a spatula or a waxing instrument. When the
margins are being carved, care should be taken to avoid abrading any

CHAPTER 13

surface of the stone die. A silk or other fine cloth may be used for a
final polishing of the pattern, rubbing toward the margins.
Waxes are thermoplastic polymers that tend to return partially
toward their original shape after manipulation over time. This is
known as elastic memory, as illustrated in Figure 13-28. When
wax is bent into a horseshoe, the molecules in the inner bend are
under compression, and those in the outer bend are in tension.
Once the stresses are gradually relieved at room temperature, the
wax tends to recover its elastic strain. However, some clinicians
prefer to apply finger pressure as the wax is cooling to help fill

A

Auxiliary Materials

305

the cavity and prevent distortion during cooling. The fingers also
accelerate the cooling rate. Although temperature changes should
be avoided, some technicians prefer to repeatedly remelt small
areas along the margins and examine them under a low-power
microscope.
Regardless of the method chosen, the most practical method
for avoiding any possible delayed distortion is to invest the pattern immediately after removal from the mouth or die, as noted
earlier. Once the investment hardens (sets), the mission of the wax
pattern is accomplished.

B

• Figure 13-28 A, A stick of inlay wax is bent into the shape of a horseshoe and floated on water at room
temperature. B, After 24 hours, the same stick of wax relaxes and becomes distorted.

Suggested Readings
Bailey JH, Donovan TE, Preston JD: The dimensional accuracy of
improved dental stone, silver-plated, and epoxy resin die materials,
J Prosthet Dent 59:307–310, 1988.
Silver-plated and epoxy resin die systems were found to be acceptable
alternatives to the improved dental stones.
Balkenhol MS, Haunschild S, Lochnit G, et al: Surfactant release from
hydrophilized vinylpolysiloxanes, J Dent Res 88:668–672, 2009.
Water droplets placed on the hydrophilized VPS absorbed surfactant
from the VPS reduced the surface tension of the water droplet. It
resulted in lower contact angle over time; surface properties of the
VPS did not change.
Barnes HA: Thixotropy—a review, J Non-Newton Fluid 70:1–33, 1997.
This review article describes in detail the thixotropic phenomenon
with examples of thixotropic systems.
Bradna P, Cerna D: Impact of water quality on setting of irreversible
hydrocolloid impression materials, J Prosthet Dent 96:443–448, 2006.
The use of tap water with high water hardness accelerated setting of
alginate impression as opposed to the use of distilled water.
Brukl CE, McConnell RM, Norling BK, et al: Influence of gauging water
composition on dental stone expansion and setting time, J Prosthet
Dent 51:218–223, 1984.
This study investigated the influence of water purity on the setting of
dental stones. It confirmed that a slurry of fine gypsum particles is the
most effective accelerator but showed that solutions of supernatant
have no significant influence on the setting of dental stone.
Craig RG, Eick JD, Peyton FA: Strength properties of waxes at various temperatures and their practical application, J Dent Res 46:300–305, 1967.
Properties of waxes are controlled by the composition and melting
range of certain components.

Ivanovski S, Savage NW, Brockhurst PJ, et al: Disinfection of dental
stone casts: Antimicrobial effects and physical property alterations,
Dent Mater 11:19–23, 1995.
This article shows that the incorporation of disinfectant in mixing
water affects setting time, setting expansion, compressive strength,
and detail reproduction; it delayed expansion of the stone, but the
changes observed were within the specification limit. Casts poured
from contaminated alginate impression showed antimicrobial effects
depending on the disinfectant used.
Kulkarni MM, Thombare RU: Dimensional changes of alginate dental
impression materials–an in vitro study, Clin Diagn 9:98–102, 2015.
Maintenance of temperature and humidity play key role during storage and transport to prevent distortion. But the study suggests immediate pouring which will minimize the distortion.
McMillan LC, Darvell BW: Rheology of dental waxes, Dent Mater
16(5):337–350, 2000.
Waxes were shown to be pseudoplastic and did not display a yield
point. The pseudoplasticity followed a power law whose exponent was
temperature dependent in a complex manner. A standardized viscosity
number was defined to characterize the flow behavior of dental waxes.
The reciprocal of the pseudoplasticity parameter provides a similarly
convenient measure of the stress-sensitivity of the wax.
Yap AU, Yap SH, Teo JC, et al: Microwave drying of high strength dental
stone: Effects on dimensional accuracy, Oper Dent 28:193–199, 2003.
This study shows that there was no significant difference in percentage weight loss from specimens that were either air dried for 24 h or
microwaved at each time interval. Significant differences in dimensional change were observed between specimens microwaved at higher
energy levels with shorter duration, and those air dried for 24 h.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Suggested Readings (Web Version)
Impression Materials
Abdelraouf RM: Chemical analysis and microstructure examination of
extended-pour alginate impression versus conventional one (characterization of dental extended-pour alginate), Int J Polym Mater
67:612–618, 2018.
The extended-pour dental alginate showed higher calcium/sodium
ratio, lower organic content, and higher powder:water ratio than the
conventional one, which may contribute to increasing its dimensional
stability. On the other hand, the functional groups and the microstructure did not show variation between both alginate types.
Balkenhol MS, Haunschild S, Lochnit G, et al: Surfactant release
from hydrophilized vinylpolysiloxanes, J Dent Res 88:668–672,
2009.
Water droplets placed on the hydrophilized VPS absorbed surfactant
from the VPS reduced the surface tension of the water droplet. It
resulted in lower contact angle over time; surface properties of the
VPS did not change.
Barnes HA: Thixotropy—a review, J Non-Newton Fluid 70:1–33, 1997.
This review article describes in detail the thixotropic phenomenon
with examples of thixotropic systems.
Batchelor JM, Todd PM: Allergic contact stomatitis caused by a polyether
dental impression material, Contact Derm 63:296–297, 2010.
Bertolo MVL, de Oliveira Tomaselli L, Vitti RP, et al: Accuracy of partially edentulous arch impressions obtained from different alginates
and storage times, Braz J Oral Sci 15:252–257, 2016.
The study concluded that the alginate impressions investigated could
be stored for up to 5 days.
Blatz MB, Sadan A, Burgess JO, et al: Selected characteristics of a new
polyvinyl siloxane impression material: A randomized clinical trial,
Quintessence Int 36:97–104, 2005.
Hydrophilized PVS impression material provided a significantly
higher proportion of impressions free of bubbles and voids than the
non-hydrophilized PVS.
Boening KW, Walter MH, Schuette U: Clinical significance of surface
activation of silicone impression materials, J Dent 26:447–452, 1998.
This study shows no significant correlation between sulcus reproduction and free surface energy or between quality ranking and free surface energy.
Bradna P, Cerna D: Impact of water quality on setting of irreversible
hydrocolloid impression materials, J Prosthet Dent 96:443–448,
2006.
The use of tap water with high water hardness accelerated setting of
alginate impression as opposed to the use of distilled water.
Chai J, Pang I-C: A study of the “thixotropic” property of elastomeric
impression materials, Int J Prosthodont 7:155–158, 1994.
The study shows shear thinning does not have a lasting effect on the
viscosity of vinyl polysiloxane, polyether, or polysulfide.
Chen SY, Liang WM, Chen FN: Factors affecting the accuracy of elastomeric impression materials, J Dent 32:603–609, 2004.
This study evaluates the effects of storage times and the proportion of
inorganic filler on the accuracy and stability of elastomeric impression
materials.
Craig RG: Review of dental impression materials, Adv Dent Res 2:51–64,
1988.
This article reviews published works from 1975 to 1986. Advances
during the period included disinfection solutions, the agar/alginate
technique, dustless alginate, new formulations of polyether and PVS,
elimination of hydrogen gas from PVS, the static mixing of PVS, and
hydrophilization of PVS.
Davis BA, Powers JM: Effect of immersion disinfection on properties of
impression materials, J Prosthodont 3:31–34, 1994.
Two 30-min cycles of disinfection in 2% acid-potentiated glutaraldehyde reduced wettability but had little effect on the dimensional
change of addition silicones and polyethers.
Grundke K, Michel S, Knispel G, et al: Wettability of silicone and polyether impression materials: Characterization by surface tension and
305.e1

contact angle measurements, Colloids Surf A: Physicochem 317:598–
609, 2008.
The decrease of the water contact angle was directly related to the
decrease in the liquid surface tension of the water droplet during
spreading. The migration of the surfactant to the outermost surface
was increasingly hindered with the progression of the polymerization
and cross-linking process.
Hosseinpour D, Berg JC: The dynamic interaction of water with four dental impression materials during cure, J Prosthodont 18:292–300, 2009.
All materials investigated in the fresh, uncured state showed qualitative decomposition, such as formation of a crater and a scum of material at its surface, from interaction with probing water. These effects
diminished with curing time until, beyond a critical value, no effects
were evident. The initial hydrophilicity was highest for polyether.
Beyond the critical curing time, different degrees of hydrophilicity
were observed, with Aquasil showing the lowest final contact angle.
Kim K-N, Craig RG, Koran A: Viscosity of monophase addition silicones
as a function of shear rate, J Prosthet Dent 67:794–798, 1992.
All products showed a 6- to 10-fold decrease in viscosity with an
increasing shear rate (shear thinning).
Klooster J, Logan GI, Tjan AHL: Effects of strain rate on the behavior of
elastomeric impressions, J Prosthet Dent 66:292–298, 1991.
This study reported that (1) polysulfide exhibited the greatest deformation with the lowest tensile strengths; (2) higher strain rates
yielded higher tensile strength; and (3) polysulfides showed the
greatest elongation at rupture, with the highest values for higher
strain rates.
Kulkarni MM, Thombare RU: Dimensional changes of alginate dental impression materials—an in vitro study, J Clin Diagn 9:98–
102, 2015.
Maintenance of temperature and humidity play key role during storage and transport to prevent distortion. But the study suggests immediate pouring which will minimize the distortion.
Lim K-C, Chong Y-H, Soh G: Effect of operator variability on void formation in impressions made with an automixed addition silicone,
Aust Dent J 37:35–38, 1992.
Automixing produced substantially fewer voids than hand mixing. There was a significant difference in the number of voids in the
impressions made by the two operators.
Lu H, Nguyen B, Powers JM: Mechanical properties of 3 hydrophilic
addition silicone and polyether elastomeric impression materials,
J Prosthet Dent 92:151–154, 2004.
The study shows that a new “soft” polyether impression material had
higher strain in compression and lower tensile strength compared to
new “hydrophilic” addition silicone materials.
Martinez JE, Combe EC, Pesun IJ: Rheological properties of vinyl polysiloxane impression pastes, Dent Mater 17:471–476, 2001.
Both PVS materials investigated in the study exhibited thixotropic
properties.
Martins F, Branco P, Reis J, et al: Dimensional stability of two impression
materials after a 6-month storage period, Acta Biomater Odontol Scand
3:84–91, 2017.
One polyether and one PVS were stored at 23 °C for 6 months and
exhibited dimensional changes below the maximum permitted by the
ISO 4823:2000.
McCabe JF, Carrick TE: Recording surface detail on moist surfaces
with elastomeric impression materials, Eur J Prosthodont Restor Dent
14:42–46, 2006.
It was concluded that the more hydrophilic nature of the polyether
and hybrid materials enabled them to record more accurate impressions of moist surfaces, particularly in areas of difficult access such as
deep grooves.
McCormick JT, Antony SJ, Dial ML, et al: Wettability of elastomeric
impression materials: Effect of selected surfactants, Int J Prosthodont
2:413–420, 1989.
There are two distinct groups of impression materials classified by surface wettability: agar, alginate, and polyether are hydrophilic, while
polysulfide and silicone (not hydrophilized) are more hydrophobic.

Menees TS, Radhakrishnan R, Ramp LC, et al: Contact angle of unset
elastomeric impression materials, J Prosthet Dent 114:536–542, 2015.
The contact angle by water increased in the order of modified PVS,
polyether and then traditional PVS. The hybrid materials were not
consistent. Saliva behaves differently from water on these materials.
Norling BK, Reisbick MH: The effect of nonionic surfactants on bubble entrapment in elastomeric impression materials, J Prosthet Dent
42:342–347, 1979.
The incorporation of nonionic surfactants into silicone and polysulfide elastomers increases their wettability by gypsum products and
results in fewer bubbles in poured casts.
Pandey P, Mantri S, Bhasin A, et al: Mechanical properties of a new vinyl
polyether silicone in comparison to vinyl polysiloxane and polyether
elastomeric impression materials, Contemp Clin Dent 10:203–207,
2019.
A combination of vinyl polysiloxane (VPS) and polyether (PE) elastomers called “polyvinyl ether silicone” is shown to be more flexible
with high tensile energy.
Penfold RdRS, Brandt WC, Miranda ME, et al: Evaluation of dimensional stability and details reproduction of alginate molds storage in
different times and temperature, Braz Dent Sci 21:37–43, 2018.
Pratten DH, Novetsky M: Detail reproduction of soft tissue: A comparison of impression materials, J Prosthet Dent 65:188–191, 1991.
Polyether and hydrophilized addition silicone were judged best in
detail reproduction and ZOE and polysulfide low-viscosity materials
were judged worst in this regard. Voids were minimized with lowviscosity polysulfide and ZOE relative to addition silicones.
Re D, De Angelis F, Augusti G, et al: Mechanical properties of elastomeric
impression materials: An in vitro comparison, Int J Dent 4(4282861-8),
2015.
The light-body vinylpolyether silicone showed high tensile strength,
yield strength, and adequate strain at yield/brake.
Rupp FD, Axmann D, Jacobi A, et al: Hydrophilicity of elastomeric nonaqueous impression materials during setting, Dent Mater 21:94–102,
2005.
Real time observation shows that contact angle on nonaqueous elastomeric impression material decreases rapidly during setting. The rate of
reduction is faster with hydrophilized PVS.
Salem NS, Combe EC, Watts DC: Mechanical properties of elastomeric
impression materials, J Oral Rehab 15:125–132, 1988
This study investigated four elastomeric impression materials. The
polysulfide had the greatest resistance to tear, but the elastic modulus
and tensile strength were less than that of the other three materials.
Sinjari B, D’Addazio G, Xhajanka E, et al: Penetration of different
impression materials into exposed dentinal tubules during the impression procedure, Materials (Basel) 13(13211-10), 2020.
The study shows that the impression materials can penetrate and
remain entrapped inside the dentinal tubules during the impression
procedures. This aspect might have a negative influence on the adhesion, and thus this study strongly supports the use of an immediate
dentine sealing procedure for adhesive restorations.
Sydiskis RK, Gerhardt DE: Cytotoxicity of impression materials, J Prosthet Dent 69:431–435, 1993.
Comparison of cell cytotoxicity and cell viability for seven types
of impression materials showed that polyether exhibited the most
adverse effects in both categories.
Takahashi H, Finger WJ: Dentin surface reproduction with hydrophilic
and hydrophobic impression materials, Dent Mater 7:197–201, 1991
No difference was found in the detail reproduction of the dentin surface by either type of PVS. It was concluded that the surface tension of
PVS before complete setting is lower than that of the dentin surface;
therefore PVS, regardless of hydrophobicity, will spread on wet dentin.
von Berg GB: Accuracy of polyether vs plaster impressions for long-span
implant supported prostheses. MSc Thesis: Johannesburg; 2007.
University of the Witwatersrand. This study shows that for polyether
impressions, the use of plaster resulted in smaller inter-abutment error
but with less predictable variance in dimensions.

Wassell RW, Ibbetson RJ: The accuracy of polyvinyl siloxane impressions made with standard and reinforced stock trays, J Prosthet Dent
645:748–757, 1992.
Using stock trays, the heavy-body/light-body combination was superior to the putty-wash impression made with the addition silicone.
Webber RL, Ryge G: The determination of tear energy of extensible
materials of dental interest, J Biomed Mater Res 2:281–296, 1968.
An equation was used that takes dimensional change of the test specimen into consideration in calculating tear energy.
Gypsum Products
Adrien J, Meille S, Tadier S, et al: In-situ x-ray tomographic monitoring
of gypsum plaster setting, Cem Concr Res 82:107–116, 2016.
Bailey JH, Donovan TE, Preston JD: The dimensional accuracy of
improved dental stone, silver-plated, and epoxy resin die materials, J Prosthet Dent 59:307–310, 1988.
Silver-plated and epoxy resin die systems were found to be acceptable
alternatives to the improved dental stones.
Berg E, Nielsen O, Skaug N: High-level microwave disinfection of dental
gypsum casts, Int J Prosthodont 18:520–525, 2005.
Microwave treatment was capable of eliminating microorganisms on
gypsum casts, whereas casts poured from disinfected alginate impressions were not free of microorganisms.
Brukl CE, McConnell RM, Norling BK, et al: Influence of gauging
water composition on dental stone expansion and setting time,
J Prosthet Dent 51:218–223, 1984.
This study investigated the influence of water purity on the setting of
dental stones. It confirmed that a slurry of fine gypsum particles is the
most effective accelerator but showed that solutions of supernatant
have no significant influence on the setting of dental stone.
Chan TKC, Darvell BW: Effect of storage conditions on calcium sulphate
hemihydrate-containing products, Dent Mater 17:134–141, 2001.
This article shows that at a relative humidity less than 70%, it would
take in excess of 1000 h of exposure before reaction within the gypsum products began. There is no evidence to suggest that there is a safe
humidity level for exposure.
Chidambaranathan AS, Balasubramanium M: Comprehensive review
and comparison of the disinfection techniques currently available in
the literature, J Prosthodon 28:849–856, 2019.
Dilts WE, Duncanson MG Jr, Collard EW: Comparative stability of cast
mounting materials, J Okla Dent Assoc 68:11–13, 1978.
Certain properties of mounting gypsum products are cited, particularly their low-setting expansion.
Hapsari ML, Irawan B, Damiyanti M: Influence of shelf life on the setting time of type IV gypsum, J Phys Conf Ser 84(1-5):012094, 2017.
Gypsum products pass expiration date exhibits longer setting time.
Ivanovski S, Savage NW, Brockhurst PJ, et al: Disinfection of dental
stone casts: Antimicrobial effects and physical property alterations, Dent Mater 11:19–23, 1995.
This article shows that the incorporation of disinfectant in mixing
water affects setting time, setting expansion, compressive strength,
and detail reproduction; it delayed expansion of the stone, but the
changes observed were within the specification limit. Casts poured
from contaminated alginate impression showed antimicrobial effects
depending on the disinfectant used.
Jørgensen KD: Studies on the setting of plaster of Paris, Odontol Tidskr
61:304–346, 1953.
The porosity of set gypsum was calculated as a function of W/P ratio.
The higher the ratio, the greater the porosity.
Kuntze RA: The Chemistry and Technology of Gypsum, Philadelphia, 1984.
American Society for Testing and Materials; STP 861.
This is an excellent reference on the basic chemistry and technological
aspects of gypsum.
Lautenschlager EP, Harcourt JK, Ploszaj LC: Setting reactions of gypsum
materials investigated by x-ray diffraction, J Dent Res 48:43–48, 1969.
This article demonstrates the conversion of the hemihydrate to the
dihydrate of calcium sulfate.

305.e2

Lewry AJ, Williamson J: The setting of gypsum plaster, J Mater Sci
29:5279–5284, 1994.
The article describes the reaction occurring in three steps: Dissolution,
nucleation, and precipitation, as well as completion associated with
depletion of reactants.
Lucas MG, Arioli-Filho JN, Nogueira SS, et al: Effect of incorporation
of disinfectant solutions on setting time, linear dimensional stability,
and detail reproduction in dental stone casts, J Prosthodont 18:521–
526, 2009.
This article shows that addition of sodium hypochlorite significantly
alters, adversely, all of the evaluated properties. However, the addition
of glutaraldehyde and chlorhexidine induces no significant changes in
the evaluated properties.
Mahler DB, Ady AB: Explanation for the hygroscopic setting expansion
of dental gypsum products, J Dent Res 39:578–589, 1960.
This is a classic study that best defines the mechanics of hygroscopic
expansion.
Proença JDS, Suzuki MM, da Costa SC, et al: Influence of different water
types on the physical and mechanical properties of gypsum, Braz J
Oral Sci 14:199–203, 2015.
The type of water, slurry, mineral, or distilled water study exhibits no
statistical difference in physical and mechanical properties.
Vyas R, Vaddamanu SK, Gurumurthy V, et al: Variations in the compressive strength of a die stone with three different sulfates at eight
different concentrations: An in vitro study, J Contemp Dent Pract
20:1297–1306, 2019.
Chemical additives such as sulfate salts may increase the CS such
that the die stone can withstand clinical and laboratory handling
forces.
Yap AU, Yap SH, Teo JC, et al: Microwave drying of high strength
dental stone: Effects on dimensional accuracy, Oper Dent 28:193–
199, 2003.
This study shows that there was no significant difference in percentage
weight loss from specimens that were either air dried for 24 h or microwaved at each time interval. Significant differences in dimensional
change were observed between specimens microwaved at higher energy
levels with shorter duration, and those air dried for 24 h.

305.e3

Dental Wax
Baum L, Phillips RW, Lund MR: Textbook of Operative Dentistry, ed, 3,
Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders.
Techniques for manipulating wax and forming the pattern are described.
Craig RG, Eick JD, Peyton FA: Strength properties of waxes at various
temperatures and their practical application, J Dent Res 46:300–
305, 1967.
Properties of waxes are controlled by the composition and melting
range of certain components.
Kotsiomiti E, McCabe JF: Stability of dental waxes following repeated
heatings, J Oral Rehabil 22:135–143, 1995.
The flow and strength properties of dental waxes were examined following excessive and repeated heating. Repeated exposure of dental
waxes to temperatures higher than 200 °C may affect the composition
and properties, resulting in inferior materials.
McMillan LC, Darvell BW: Rheology of dental waxes, Dent Mater
16:337–350, 2000.
Waxes were shown to be pseudoplastic and did not display a yield
point. The pseudoplasticity followed a power law whose exponent was
temperature dependent in a complex manner. A standardized viscosity
number was defined to characterize the flow behavior of dental waxes.
The reciprocal of the pseudoplasticity parameter provides a similarly
convenient measure of the stress-sensitivity of the wax.
Michalakis KX, Kapsampeli V, Kitsou A, et al: Marginal adaptation of
four inlay casting waxes on stone, titanium, and zirconia dies, J Prosthet Dent 112:70–78, 2014.
A significant correlation was found between the marginal accuracy
and the contact angle values. As the contact angle value became
smaller, the marginal accuracy improved.
Taha D, Nour M, Zohdy M, et al: The effect of different wax pattern
fabrication techniques on the marginal fit of customized lithium disilicate implant abutments, J Prosthodont 28:1018–1023, 2019.
Wax patterns for pressing lithium disilicate abutments were made by CAD/
CAM milling, 3D printing, and conventional layering. The conventional
layering pattern and resultant pressed prostheses exhibits the best fit to the
titanium insert among the three methods of fabricating wax patterns.

14

Casting Investments and
Casting Procedures
OUTLINE
Preparation of the Master Die

Casting Procedure

Wax Pattern and Sprue Design

Clinical Evaluation of Casting Fit

Investment Materials

Causes of Defective Castings

Investing Procedure

KEY TERMS
Burnout Process of heating an invested mold to eliminate the
embedded wax or plastic pattern.
Casting (1) The process by which a wax pattern is converted to
a metallic replica of a prepared tooth restoration. (2) A dental
restoration formed by the solidification of a molten metal in a
mold.
Hygroscopic expansion Amount of setting expansion that occurs
when a gypsum-bonded casting investment is immersed in

38 °C water during setting. (See Chapter 13, Auxiliary Materials,
for more information on this process.)
Refractory Capable of sustaining exposure to a high temperature
without significant degradation.
Sprue The mold channel through which molten metal or ceramic
flows into a mold cavity.
Sprued wax pattern A wax form consisting of the prosthesis pattern and the attached ingate or sprue network.

The lost wax method has been used to fabricate prostheses made of
metal, ceramic, and polymers. Although the principle of the process is the same for all three classes of materials, there are distinct
differences unique to each material. Fabrication of ceramic- and
polymer-based prostheses was presented in Chapters 10 (Fabrication of Metal-Ceramic Prostheses) and 11 (Heat-Activated
Denture Base Resins), respectively. This chapter will focus on the
metals only.
The process requires a die that duplicates the oral tissue needing a replacement or prosthesis. A wax pattern (Figure 14-1) of the
prosthesis is built on the laboratory indirect die by carving wax
to the exact dimension. The wax pattern is then removed from
the die and placed in a casting ring to be filled with investment
materials. After the investment sets, the casting ring is heated to
melt and burn out the wax. The investment material in the casting
ring is now a negative of the final prosthesis. The negative mold
is then filled with molten metal. After the metal cools, the investment is fragmented and removed, leaving the prosthesis. This is a
very brief description of the process. In practice, there are many
fine details. The focus of this chapter is first to prepare a die suitable for fabricating the wax pattern. The wax pattern is then fixed
in a casting ring with cylindric segments known as an ingate or
sprue for the flow of molten metal to fill the mold cavity, made by
investing in a refractory material (Figure 14-2). The molten metal

is introduced to the empty space with pressure. Finally, there is a
discussion of casting defects.

306

CRITICAL QUESTION
What methods can be used to increase the abrasion resistance of master dies?

Preparation of the Master Die
The most commonly used die materials are type IV and type V
improved gypsum dental stones (Chapter 13, Types of Gypsum
Products). Type IV stones have a setting expansion of 0.1% or
less, whereas type V stones may expand as much as 0.3%. This
greater expansion is useful in compensating for the relatively large
solidification shrinkage of base-metal alloys.
The chief disadvantage of the type IV gypsum die is its susceptibility to abrasion during carving of the wax pattern. To overcome
deficiencies of gypsum dies, several modifications or different
materials have been used:
• Silver or copper plating, coating the surface with cyanoacrylate
adhesive, or adding a die hardener to the gypsum can be used
to improve abrasion resistance of gypsum master dies.
• Several coats of resin-based spacer, such as nail polish, can be
painted on a stone die away from the margins of the restoration

CHAPTER 14

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

TABLE 14-1

307

Dimensional Change in Dies Made
From a Silicone Impression Compared
With a Standardized Die
DIMENSIONAL CHANGE (%)

Reservoir
Sprue former

Die material

Occlusal

Cervical

Type IV die stone

0.06

0.00

Type IV stone plus hardener A

0.16

0.08

Type IV stone plus hardener B

0.10

0.10

Silica-filled epoxy resin

−0.15

−0.26

Aluminum-filled epoxy resin

−0.14

−0.19

• Figure 14-1 Primary sprue oriented directly toward the wax pattern

Electroformed silver

−0.10

−0.20

(left). Note the spherical reservoir on the vertical sprue. Indirect sprue design showing a horizontal reservoir runner bar that is positioned near the
heat center of the invested ring (right).

Reproduced with permission from Toreskog S, Phillips RW, Schnell RJ: Properties of die
materials: a comparative study, J Prosthet Dent 16:119, 1966.

G

H
F

C
B

E
D

A

• Several gypsum die stones have been compounded with resins
to provide the advantages of both materials. These modified die
stones maintain the low expansion of conventional die stone,
but they also have the increased toughness and resistance to
carving imparted by the resins.
• Metal dies produced from electroplated impression material
have moderately high strength, adequate hardness, and excellent
abrasion resistance. The first step is treating the impression to
make it conductive to electrical current. The metallized impression is the cathode in the electroplating bath, along with a silver plate as the anode. A direct current is applied to transfer
silver from the plate to the impression, a reverse process of corrosion discussed in Chapter 3, Electrochemical Properties. The
impression is then filled with dental gypsum stone. When the
stone sets, a die with an electroformed metal shell is obtained.
It is important to note that some of the methods described can alter
the die dimensions slightly, thus reducing accuracy (Table 14.1).

• Figure 14-2 Diagrammatic representation of a dental casting mold:
A, Crucible former. B, Sprue. C, Cavity formed by wax pattern after burnout. D, Reservoir. E, Investment. F, Liner. G, Casting ring. H, Recommended maximum investment thickness of approximately 6 mm between the
end of the mold cavity and the end of the invested ring to provide pathways for sufficient gas escape during casting.

CRITICAL QUESTION

to produce relief space for cement luting agent and ensure
complete seating of an otherwise precisely fitting casting or
coping.
• To eliminate the possibility of distortion of the wax pattern on
removal from the die or during the setting of the investment,
one technique is to pour up the die with an investment material with comparable properties to die materials.
• Nongypsum die materials, such as acrylic, polyester, and epoxy
resins, are used because of their superior abrasion resistance.
Compatibility between die material and the impression material is specific to the brand rather than to chemical types of
impression materials. Even though these dies are generally
undersized in comparison with the prepared tooth, they are
used successfully, presumably because dimensional compensation has occurred during the investing and casting procedure.

Wax Pattern and Sprue Design

What casting deficiencies may result when: (1) the sprue former is too small
in diameter, (2) the sprue former is attached without flaring to thinner areas,
(3) the sprues are oriented toward thin areas of a wax pattern, or (4) the
sprues are of inadequate length to position the wax pattern less than 6 mm
from the end of the invested ring?

To provide a pathway or ingate to the mold cavity for molten
metal, the wax or resin pattern must have one or more cylindrical
wax segments attached at the desired point(s) of metal entry; this
arrangement is termed a sprued wax pattern. A sprue is the channel in a refractory investment mold through which molten metal
flows. After the wax pattern has been made, a sprue-former base is
attached to the sprued wax pattern, an investment ring is pressed
into the sprue-former base, and an investment slurry is vibrated
into the ring to embed the wax pattern in the investment, usually under vacuum. Examples of sprued wax patterns on a sprueformer base are shown in Figure 14-1.
The diameter, the length of the sprue former (also referred to
simply as the sprue), and the position of attachment depend on the

308

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

type and size of the pattern, the type of casting machine to be used,
and the dimensions of the ring in which the casting will be made.

Wax-Pattern Removal
The sprue former should be attached to the wax pattern with
the pattern on the master die, provided that the pattern can be
removed directly in line with its path of withdrawal from the die.
Any motion that might distort the wax pattern should be avoided
during removal. The gauge selection and design for the sprue
former are often empirical, but optimal performance during the
casting process is based on the five general principles discussed in
the following subsections.

Sprue Diameter
Select a sprue former with a diameter that is approximately the
same size as the thickest bulk of the wax pattern. If the pattern is
small, the sprue former must also be small because attaching a large
sprue former to a thin, delicate pattern could cause distortion. On
the other hand, if the sprue former’s diameter is too small, it may
solidify before the casting itself, and localized shrinkage porosity (“suck-back” porosity) may develop. As shown in Figure 14-3,
reservoir sprues are used to help overcome this problem.

The sprue former should be long enough to position the pattern properly in the casting ring within 6 mm of the trailing end
(Figure 14-2) and yet short enough so that the molten alloy does
not solidify before it fills the mold.
A reservoir should be added to a sprue network to prevent
localized shrinkage porosity (Figure 14-3). When the molten
alloy fills the heated casting ring, the pattern area should solidify
first, and the reservoir last. The molten metal in the reservoir
remains molten to furnish additional liquid alloy into the mold
as it solidifies.
The length of the sprue former depends on the length of the
casting ring. If the sprue is too short, the wax pattern may be so
far removed from the end of the casting ring that gases cannot
be adequately vented to permit the molten alloy to fill the ring
completely. When these gases are not eliminated, the casting will
be incomplete. The sprue length should be adjusted so that the top
of the wax pattern is within 6 mm of the open end of the ring for
gypsum-bonded investments (Figure 14-2) and within 3 to 4 mm
of the top of the phosphate-based investment.

Investment Materials
The material for making the mold must be refractory and thermally stable so that it can withstand exposure to the high temperatures of molten metal as the metal solidifies and cools to room

Sprue Position and Attachment
The sprue-former connection to the wax pattern is generally
flared for higher-density gold alloys but often restricted for lowerdensity alloys. Flaring of the sprue former may act in much the
same way as a reservoir, smoothing the entry of the fluid alloy
into the pattern area with less turbulence. The position of the
sprue-former attachment is often a matter of individual judgment
and intuition, based on the shape and form of the wax pattern. As
indicated earlier, the ideal area for the sprue former is the point of
greatest bulk in the pattern to avoid distorting thin areas of wax
during attachment to the pattern and permit complete flow of the
alloy into the mold cavity.
Then, it is best for the molten alloy to flow from a thick section
to surrounding thin areas (e.g., the margins). The sprue former
should not be attached to a broad, flat surface at a right angle.
Such an orientation leads to turbulence within the mold cavity
and porosity in this region (Figure 14-4, A). When this same pattern is sprued at a 45-degree angle to the proximal area, a satisfactory casting is obtained (Figure 14-4, B).

A

B

• Figure 14-3 Localized shrinkage (pointer) caused by using a sprue diameter thinner than required.

• Figure 14-4 Effect of sprue orientation. A, Detached sprue indicates
severe porosity at the point of attachment because of turbulence caused
by an improper sprue angle. B, Sound casting results with the sprue at
approximately 45 degrees to the proximal wall.

CHAPTER 14

temperature. In addition, the mold or investment material must
not interact chemically with the metal surface, and it must be easy
to remove from the metal casting.
Generally, two types of investments—gypsum-bonded and
phosphate-bonded—are employed, depending on the melting
range of the alloy to be cast. A third type is the ethyl silicate–
bonded investment, which is used principally for the casting of
removable partial dentures made from base metals (cobalt-based
and nickel-based alloys). Because the thermal contraction coefficients of the alloys are higher than that of the investment mold, the
dimension of the prosthesis when cooled to room temperature will
be smaller in dimension than the wax pattern’s intended dimension. The difference of the dimension is called casting shrinkage.
To obtain a prosthesis of the intended dimension, the investment
mold needs to expand during setting and expand more during
burnout to compensate for the casting shrinkage.

Gypsum-Bonded Investments
The gypsum-based materials represent the type traditionally used
for casting gold alloys. There are two classifications by International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 7490 (American
National Standards Institute [ANSI]/American Dental Association [ADA] 126): type 1 is used for casting inlays, onlays, crowns,
or other fixed prostheses, and type 2 is used for removable partial
denture frameworks.

0.4

0.0
Type IV Stone
W/P - .22
0.4

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

309

Composition
The ingredients of gypsum-based investments are α-hemihydrate
of gypsum as binder, polymorphs of silica as fillers, and other
ingredients as modifiers.
The binder holds the filler together and provides the investment strength. When the binder is heated at temperatures sufficiently high to completely dehydrate the investment, it shrinks
considerably, and occasionally fractures. As Figure 14-5 shows,
when the temperature is raised to 200 to 400 °C, it dehydrates and
shrinks. A slight expansion occurs between 400 and 700 °C, and
a large contraction then takes place at higher temperatures, caused
by decomposition of the calcium sulfate. Thus it is imperative that
gypsum investments not be heated above 700 °C.
To compensate for the inherent contraction associated with
gypsum and casting shrinkage, polymorphs of silica are incorporated in the investment. Silica exists in at least four polymorphs:
quartz, tridymite, cristobalite, and fused quartz. When quartz,
tridymite, or cristobalite is heated, a change in crystalline form
occurs at transition temperatures characteristic of each polymorph of silica (Figure 14-6). This crystalline transition is called
an inversion. Each crystalline transition from lower temperature
(α phase) to higher temperature (β phase) is accompanied by a
linear expansion. For example, the inversion completes at 573 °C
for quartz, at 200 and 270 °C for cristobalite, and at 117 and
163 °C for tridymite. In powdered form, the inversions occur
over a temperature range rather than instantaneously at a specific temperature. By the quantity of thermal expansion shown
in Figure 14-6, quartz and cristobalite are of particular dental
interest.
In addition to silica, certain modifying agents, coloring matter,
and reducing agents, such as carbon and powdered copper, are
present. The reducing agents are used to provide a nonoxidizing
atmosphere in the mold when a gold alloy is cast. Some of the
modifiers not only regulate the setting expansion and the setting
time but also prevent most of the shrinkage of gypsum when it is
heated above 300 °C. In some instances, the modifiers are needed
to regulate the setting time and setting expansion, as described for
the dental stones.

Type III Stone
W/P - .30

2.0
Cristobalite

1.2
1.6
Thermal expansion (%)

Expansion (%)

0.8

Plaster
W/P - .50

1.6

2.0

Quartz
1.2
Tridmite
0.8

0.4

2.4

Fused quartz
0.0

2.8
0

200

400

600

800

1000

Temperature (°C)

• Figure 14-5 Dimensional change of three forms of gypsum when heated. (Courtesy R. Neiman, Whip Mix Corporation, Louisville, KY.)

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Temperature (°C)

• Figure 14-6 Thermal expansion of four polymorphs of silica. (Courtesy
R. Neiman, Whip Mix Corporation, Louisville, KY.)

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Setting Expansion
Typically, the setting expansion of these investments is controlled
by retarders and accelerators for the gypsum. The exothermic
heat of gypsum setting can result in expansion of the wax pattern
before the investment sets, influencing the effective setting expansion. The expansion of the investment may cause distortion of
the wax pattern. Consider a mesio-occulso-distal (MOD) restoration as an example; the investment inside of MOD can force the
proximal walls of the wax pattern outward as it sets. If the pattern
has a thin wall, the effective setting expansion is somewhat greater
than that for a pattern with thicker walls because the investment
can move the thinner wall more readily. Also, the softer the wax,
the greater the effective setting expansion because the softer wax
is more readily deformed by the expanding investment. If a softer
wax is used, the setting expansion may cause excessive distortion
of the pattern.
Hygroscopic Setting Expansion
As illustrated in Figure 14-7, the hygroscopic setting expansion
may be six or more times greater than the normal setting expansion of a dental investment. If greater expansion is needed, there
are many factors in the control of hygroscopic expansion.
The magnitude of hygroscopic setting expansion is generally proportional to the silica content of the investment, which
becomes greater with a finer size of silica. Filler plays no role in
hygroscopic expansion; it is the interface between filler and gypsum that allows added water to diffuse through the setting material and increased expansion.
As discussed for gypsum products, the higher the water/powder (W/P) ratio of the original investment water mixture, the less
the hygroscopic setting expansion. As the mixing time is reduced,
the hygroscopic expansion is decreased. The older the investment,
the lower is its hygroscopic expansion. The greatest amount of
hygroscopic setting expansion is observed if the immersion takes
place before the initial set. The longer the immersion of the investment in the water bath is delayed beyond the time of the initial

set of the investment, the lower the hygroscopic expansion. The
effects of the W/P ratio, mixing, and shelf life on the maximal
hygroscopic setting expansion are illustrated in Figure 14-8 relative to the amount of water added during setting.

Thermal Expansion
The effect of cristobalite compared with that of quartz is demonstrated in Figure 14-9. Because of the much greater expansion that
occurs during the inversion of cristobalite, the normal contraction of gypsum during heating is readily eliminated. Furthermore,
the expansion occurs at a lower temperature because of the lower

A

1.6

B
1.4
Linear expansion (%)

310

C

1.2

D

Less spatulation
Aged investment

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

Water added (mL)

• Figure 14-8 Relationship of linear hygroscopic setting expansion and
amount of water added as influenced by certain manipulative factors. (Data
from Asgar K, Mahler DB, Peyton FA: Hygroscopic technique for inlay casting using controlled water additions, J Prosthet Dent 5:711–724, 1955.)

1.2
B

Cristobalite
Containing
Investment

1.6
1.0
1.4
Thermal expansion (%)

Setting expansion (%)

Thinner mix

1.0

1.8

1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4

0

10

20
Time (min)

30

0.8
0.6
25% Plaster +
75% Quartz
Investment

0.4
0.2

A

0.2
0.0

Average mix

40

• Figure 14-7 Setting expansion and hygroscopic expansion of a gypsumbonded investment. A, Normal setting expansion of dental investment.
B, Hygroscopic setting expansion. The investment was immersed in water
5 minutes after the beginning of mixing; the water/powder ratio was 0.30.

0.0
0

100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
Temperature (°C)

• Figure 14-9 Thermal expansion of an investment that contains 25%
plaster of Paris and 75% quartz (red) and an investment that contains
cristobalite rather than quartz (brown). (Courtesy Dr. George Paffenbarger.)

CHAPTER 14

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

311

strength should not be unduly high. When the alloy is still hot
and weak, the investment can resist alloy shrinkage by virtue of its
strength and constant dimensions. This can cause distortion and
even fracture of the casting if the hot strength of the alloy is low.

+1.0
+.9

W/P = .30
+.8

Porosity of Set Investment
As the molten metal enters the mold under pressure during casting, the trapped air must be forced out ahead of the inflowing
metal. If the air is not completely expelled, a back pressure builds
up to prevent the molten alloy from completely filling the mold.
The simplest method for venting the mold is through the pores of
the investment. Thus it is important that the end of a wax pattern
that is nearest to the end of the investment ring not be covered by
more than 6 mm of investment to allow sufficient interconnectivity of the porous network for the escape of gas from the mold
cavity during filling of the mold with molten metal.

+.7

W/P = .40
+.6

Expansion (%)

+.5

W/P = .50

+.4
+.3
+.2
+.1
0
-.1
-.2
0
32

100
212

200
392

300
572

400
752

500 600 700 800 900
932 1112 1292 1472 1652

°C
°F

Temperature

• Figure 14-10 Effect of water/powder ratio on the thermal expansion of
an investment containing 20% plaster of Paris and 80% quartz. (Courtesy
Dr. George Paffenbarger.)

inversion temperature of the cristobalite in comparison with that of
quartz. A reasonably good fit of the casting is obtained when a gold
alloy is cast into the mold at temperatures of 500 °C and higher.
The thermal expansion curves of an investment provide some idea
of the polymorph of the silica that is present. As can be seen from
Figure 14-9, the investments containing cristobalite expand earlier
and to a greater extent than those containing quartz. Most current
investments are likely to contain both quartz and cristobalite.
The magnitude of thermal expansion is related to the amount
of solids present. This effect is demonstrated by the curves shown
in Figure 14-10. The same figure also shows that it is imperative to
measure the water and powder accurately for proper compensation.
The addition of small amounts of sodium, potassium, or lithium chlorides to the investment eliminates the contraction caused
by gypsum and increases the expansion without the need for an
excessive amount of silica.

Strength
The strength of an investment is usually measured under compressive stress and is increased according to the amount and type of
gypsum binder present. The use of chemical modifiers increases
the strength because more of the binder can be used without a
marked reduction in thermal expansion. The strength of the
investment is affected by the W/P ratio in the same manner as
any other gypsum product; the more water employed during mixing, the lower the compressive strength. After the investment has
cooled to room temperature, its strength decreases considerably,
presumably because of fine cracks that form during cooling.
Although a certain minimal strength is necessary to prevent
fracture of the investment mold during casting, the compressive

Storage
Gypsum-based investments should be stored in airtight and
moisture-proof containers. During use, the containers should be
opened for as short a time as possible. All investments are composed of several ingredients, each of which possesses a different
density. There is a tendency for the components of the investment
to separate as they settle, according to their specific gravity. It is
advisable to purchase prepackaged investments in relatively small
quantities if investments are needed on an infrequent basis.
The investment supplied in bulk packages should be weighed,
and the water should be measured according to the proportion of
the investment mix. In this manner, one can control the setting
or the thermal expansion in relation to the compensation needed
for the casting shrinkage and other important properties. One
need only measure the gauging water.
One should be aware of slight variations in the weight of premeasured packets of powder. The quality control of investment products
is related not only to the homogeneity of particulate components
but also to variations in the weight of powder in the packets.

Phosphate-Bonded Investment
The use of alloys with higher melting temperature ranges, such as
those for metal-ceramic restorations, usually leads to greater thermal contraction after solidification. This necessitates an investment material that is more heat resistant with greater expansion.
Phosphate-based investments are designed primarily for alloys
used to produce copings or frameworks for metal-ceramic prostheses and some base-metal alloys (Chapter 9, Manipulation of
Base Metal Alloys).

Composition
Phosphate-based investments contain refractory fillers and a
binder. The silica filler is typically 80% by weight. The particle
size varies from submicron to that of a fine sand. The binder consists of magnesium oxide (basic) and monoammonium phosphate
(acidic). A colloidal silica suspension in place of water is used for
mixing phosphate investments.
Setting Reaction
The chemical reaction for the phosphate-based binder system is
as follows:
NH4 H2 PO4  MgO  5H2 O NH4 MgPO4 . 6H2 O.
(1)

312

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

1.4

1.3

700

sion (

xpan
rmal e

Thermal expansion (%)

1.2

The

Expansion (%)

1.0
0.8

ion

ns

g
ttin

a
xp

e

Se

0.6

Special liquid

1.2

) °C
–1000

1.1
1.0

Water

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.4

0.1
0.0
0

0.2

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Temperature (°C)

• Figure 14-12 Thermal expansion of a phosphate-bonded investment

0.0
0

20

40

60

80

100

Liquid concentration (%)

• Figure 14-11 Influence of liquid concentration on the setting and ther-

mixed with water compared with the “special liquid.” (Courtesy R. Neiman,
Whip Mix Corporation, Louisville, KY.)

mal expansion of a phosphate-bonded investment. (Courtesy R. Neiman,
Whip Mix Corporation, Louisville, KY.)

Mechanical mixing under vacuum is preferred. The liquid/powder
(L/P) ratio also affects the working and setting time; an increase in
the L/P ratio increases the working time.

The reaction product is predominantly colloidal multimolecular (NH4MgPO4.6H2O)n aggregate around excess MgO
and fillers. On heating, the binder of the set investment undergoes thermal reactions that appear to be the decomposition of
(NH4MgPO4.6H2O)n. It begins to lose water around 50 °C and
dehydrates to (NH4MgPO4.H2O)n at 160 °C. Further heating
to 300 to 650 °C expels the remaining water and ammonia
from the phosphate compound and results in a noncrystalline
polymeric phase of (Mg2P2O7)n. As the temperature increases,
the noncrystalline phase begins to crystalize. The resulting reaction products of phosphate-bonded investments are crystalline
Mg2P2O7, excess MgO, and essentially unchanged silicas. In
addition, Mg3(P2O4)2 may be formed if the investment is grossly
overheated above 1040 °C or if the molten metal contacts the
mold-cavity surfaces.

Surface Quality of Cast Metals
The detail reproduction and surface smoothness of a metal-ceramic
gold cast in a phosphate-bonded investment are considered inferior to those of a conventional gold alloy cast in a gypsum-bonded
investment. Increasing the ratio of “special liquid” to water used
for the mix enhances casting surface smoothness but can lead to
oversized castings. Improvements in the technique and the composition of phosphate-bonded investments now make it possible
to fabricate castings having few surface imperfections on low-fusing gold alloy, high-fusing gold alloy, or base-metal alloy.

Setting and Thermal Expansion
The setting reaction yields a slight expansion, which can be
increased considerably by using a colloidal silica solution (special
liquid) instead of water. Figure 14-11 shows the effect of the concentration of colloidal silica in aqueous suspension on the setting
and thermal expansion. Figure 14-12 shows the thermal expansion of a typical phosphate investment mixed with water compared with the same investment mixed with its accompanying
special liquid. The early thermal shrinkage of phosphate investments is associated with decomposition of the binder, magnesium
ammonium phosphate, and is accompanied by the evolution of
ammonia, which is readily apparent by its odor.
Working and Setting Time
The working and setting time of phosphate investments are
affected by temperature. The warmer the mix, the faster it sets.
Increased mixing time and mixing efficiency result in a faster
set and a greater rise in temperature. The ideal technique is to
mix as long as possible yet have just enough time for investing.

Ethyl Silicate–Bonded Investment
The binder of ethyl silicate–bonded investments is a silica gel that
reverts to silica (cristobalite) on heating, and the fillers are silicas and magnesium oxide. A colloidal silicic acid is first formed
by hydrolyzing ethyl silicate in the presence of hydrochloric acid,
ethyl alcohol, and water. The reaction, in its simplest form, can be
expressed as follows:
Si  OC 2 H5 4  4H2 O HCl

Si  OH 4  4C 2 H5OH.
(2)
The colloidal sol of silicic acid goes through a condensation
polymerization reaction, forming a three-dimensional (3-D) polysilicic network that interacts with silicas, and magnesium oxide is
a coherent gel of polysilicic acid forms, accompanied by a setting
shrinkage. The addition of magnesium oxide neutralizes acid and
strengthens the gel.
This soft gel is dried at a temperature below 168 °C. During
the drying process, the gel loses alcohol and water to form a concentrated, harder gel. As might be expected, volumetric contraction accompanies drying, which reduces the size of the mold. This
contraction is known as green shrinkage, which is additive to the
setting shrinkage.

CHAPTER 14

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

313

The remaining cast is somewhat fragile because the amount of
binder is quite low, and it is essentially composed of silica. The
wax pattern is formed on a refractory cast and invested in a manner like other investments. However, the process for an ethyl silicate–bonded investment is a little more complicated than that for
the phosphate type, in that care must be exercised during handling
and burnout because flammable alcohol is given off. If the ethyl
silicate–bonded investment is heated to a sufficiently high temperature, some silica converts to quartz and provides added expansion. This type of investment can be heated to between 1090 and
1180 °C and is compatible with the higher-fusing alloys. Its low
setting expansion minimizes distortion.

vibration should be avoided because it can cause solids in the
investment to settle and may lead to free-water accumulation adjacent to the wax pattern, resulting in surface roughness. Excessive
vibration can also dislodge small patterns from the sprue former,
resulting in a miscast.
If the hygroscopic technique is employed, the filled casting
ring is immediately placed in a 37 °C water bath with the crucible former’s side down. For the thermal expansion or high-heat
technique, the invested ring is bench-set undisturbed for the time
recommended by the manufacturer.

Investing Procedure

How does nonuniform investment expansion occur? How can excessive
longitudinal expansion be minimized?

The overall procedures involved in investing and casting are quite
similar for gypsum-based and phosphate-based investment materials; therefore they are described simultaneously. For best results,
the manufacturer’s recommendations for the specific alloy used
should be followed.
A wax-pattern cleaner should be used to remove any debris,
grease, or oils. Excess liquid is shaken off, and the pattern is left
to air-dry while the investment is being prepared. The thin film
of cleanser left on the pattern reduces the surface tension of the
investment mixture, making it “wet” the wax pattern better to
ensure complete coverage of the intricate portions of the pattern.
While the wax pattern cleaner is air-drying, the appropriate
amount of liquid for the investment material is dispensed in a
clean, dry mixing bowl, and the powder is gradually added to the
liquid to minimize air entrapment. Hand spatula mixing is performed gently until all the powder has been wet. Although continuing hand-mixing to completion is an option, it is far more
common to complete mixing mechanically under vacuum.

Vacuum Mixing
Mechanical mixing under vacuum removes the air bubbles created during mixing and evacuates any potentially harmful gases
produced by the chemical reaction of the high-heat investments.
Once mixing is complete, the pattern may be hand invested or
vacuum invested. For investing by hand, the entire pattern is
painted (inside and out) with a thin layer of investment. The casting ring is positioned on the crucible former, and the remainder
of the investment is vibrated slowly into the ring. With vacuum
investing, the same equipment used to mix the investment is
employed to invest the pattern without breaking vacuum.
As noted, the porosity in the investment is reduced by vacuum
investing. As a result, the texture of the cast surface is somewhat
smoother, with better detail reproduction. The tensile strength of
vacuum-mixed investment is also increased. One study found that
95% of vacuum-invested castings were free of nodules, whereas
only 17% of castings made in hand-invested molds were entirely
free of defects. Freedom of any surface imperfections is highly
important because even a small nodule on a casting may damage
a fragile enamel margin when the casting is evaluated for fit in the
prepared cavity, and thus it may not seat completely. The finished
casting should always be checked under magnification for such
defects before fitting it on the die.
Air bubbles that remain in the mix, even with vacuum mixing,
can be entrapped on flat or concave surfaces that are not oriented
suitably for air evacuation. Tilting the ring slightly aids in releasing these bubbles so that they can rise to the surface. Excessive

CRITICAL QUESTIONS

Control of Shrinkage Compensation
Recall the earlier discussion of controlling casting shrinkages by
either setting (includes hygroscopic) expansion or the thermal
expansion of the investment. Both techniques are currently in use
and are commonly termed the hygroscopic expansion (low-heat)
method and the thermal expansion (high-heat) method. As their names
alone might indicate, the high-heat method requires thermal expansion of the investment to occur between room temperature and a
high temperature (650 to 700 °C for gypsum-bonded investments,
and up to 1030 °C for phosphate-bonded investments). With the
low-heat method, the hygroscopic expansion of the investment is
responsible for mold enlargement, and the mold is heated between
482 and 510 °C for casting high-noble crown and bridge alloys.
Occasionally, it may be desirable to alter the mold dimensions
of a full cast crown compared with a small inlay. Additional steps
can be taken to expand the ability to compensate for the inherent
casting shrinkage.

Casting Ring Liner
With the use of solid metal rings or casting flasks, provisions must
be made to permit investment expansion in the nonaxial (radial)
direction. The mold may become smaller rather than larger because
of the reverse pressure resulting from the confinement of the setting
expansion. This effect can be overcome by using a split ring or flexible rubber ring that permits the setting expansion of the investment.
However, the most commonly used technique to provide
investment expansion is to line the walls of the unsplit casting ring
with a liner. Traditionally, asbestos was the material of choice, but
it can no longer be used because its carcinogenic potential makes
it a biohazard. Two types of nonasbestos ring liner materials have
been produced: an aluminosilicate ceramic liner and a cellulose
(paper) liner.
To ensure uniform expansion, the clinician or technician cuts
the liner to fit the inside diameter of the casting ring with no overlap. The dry liner is tacked in position with sticky wax, and it is
then used either dry or wet. With a wet liner technique, the lined
ring is immersed in water for a time, and the excess water is shaken
away. Squeezing the liner should be avoided because this leads to
variable amounts of water removal and nonuniform expansion.
Although a ceramic liner may not absorb as much water as a cellulose liner, the ceramic liner’s network of fibers can retain water
on the surface.
The liner affords greater radial setting expansion in the investment, and the absorbed water causes a semihygroscopic expansion
as it is drawn into the investment during setting, as shown for

314

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

B

Hygroscopic
expansion

1.4

Expansion (%)

1.2
1.0

Two asbestos liners

D

Semihygroscopic
expansion

0.8

C
One asbestos liner

0.6
0.4

Normal setting
expansion

0.2

A

0.0
0

15

30

45

60

75

90

105

120

Time (min)

• Figure 14-13 Effect of liner and setting condition on the setting expansion. A, Normal setting. B, Hygroscopic expansion of an investment compared with the somewhat restricted expansion that occurs in an inlay ring
containing one liner (C) or two liners (D). (Courtesy R. Neiman, Whip Mix
Corporation, Louisville, KY.)

gypsum investments in Figure 14-13. The use of one liner (C in
Figure 14-13) increases the normal setting expansion compared
with no liner. Using a thicker liner material or two layers of liner
(D in Figure 14-13) provides even greater semihygroscopic expansion and affords a more unrestricted normal setting expansion
of the investment. As shown in Figure 14-13, two layers of liner
can be used to increase the expansion slightly compared with that
obtained from one liner. In any case, the thickness of the liner
should not be less than approximately 1 mm.
Because cellulose liners are paper products, they are burned
away during the burnout procedure, and a technique must be
found to secure the investment in the ring. However, the desired
length of the liner remains a matter of controversy. If the length
of the liner is somewhat shorter than that of the ring itself, the
investment will be confined at one or both ends of the ring.
The longitudinal setting and hygroscopic expansion are thereby
restricted compared with an arrangement where the liner is flush
with the ends of the ring.
The expansion of the investment is always greater in the unrestricted longitudinal direction than in the radial direction—that
is, toward the inside of the ring. Therefore it is desirable to reduce
the expansion in the longitudinal direction. Placing the liner
somewhat short (Figure 14-2) of the ends of the ring tends to
produce a more uniform expansion; thus there is less chance for
distortion of the wax pattern and the mold.

Altering Liquid/Powder Ratio
As previously discussed, two liners allow for greater setting and
thermal expansion than does a single liner (Figure 14-13). Also,
the setting, hygroscopic, and thermal expansions of investments
can be controlled to a certain extent by varying the L/P ratio of
the investment. The lower the L/P ratio, the greater the potential
for investment expansion. Conversely, thinner mixes reduce the
expansion. With some investments, however, the effect of minor
adjustments to the L/P ratio are insignificant.

There is a limit as to how much the L/P ratio can be altered. If
the mix is too thick, it cannot be applied to the pattern without a
likelihood of distorting the pattern and producing air voids during
investing. On the other hand, if the mixture is too thin, a rough
surface on the casting may be the result.
Another possible problem is too much expansion of the mold
when the thermal expansion technique is used with a cristobalite
investment. A thermal expansion of 1.3% may take place. If an
effective setting expansion of 0.3% to 0.4% is added to such a
thermal expansion, a total linear expansion as high as 1.7% may
be obtained, higher than the average thermal casting shrinkage of
a gold alloy. As a result, a cast crown may be too large.
In addition to controlling the hygroscopic expansion by
the L/P ratio, expansion can be regulated by reducing the time
of immersion of the setting investment or by controlling the
amount of water to be added during the setting process. The
longer the delay before the investment is immersed in the water
bath, the less the amount of hygroscopic expansion that can
occur.
The modern hygroscopic investment technique generally provides the precise expansion needed for most types of patterns.
However, some patterns may require a variation in expansion.
Using higher burnout and water-bath temperatures increases the
expansion, and vice versa.

Controlled Water-Added Technique
The linear hygroscopic expansion increases directly with the
amount of water added until maximum expansion is attained.
The compositions of investments used with the water-added
hygroscopic casting technique ensure maximal expansion during immersion in water. The amount of hygroscopic expansion
needed for compensation is then obtained by adding only enough
water to provide the desired expansion.
A soft, flexible rubber ring is used instead of the usual lined
metal ring. The pattern is invested as usual. A specified amount
of water is then added on top of the investment in the rubber
ring, and the investment can set, usually at room temperature. The
controlled water-added technique is rarely used, however, because
the hygroscopic expansion method described earlier provides adequate expansion in most cases.

Casting Procedure
Once the investment has set for an appropriate period—approximately at least 1 hour for most gypsum- and phosphate-bonded
investments—it is ready for burnout. The procedures for the two
types of investments are similar, so the following discussion focuses
on gypsum investments. The crucible former and any metal sprue
formers are carefully removed. Any debris from the ingate area
(funneled opening at the end of the ring) is cleaned with a brush.
If the burnout procedure does not immediately follow the investing procedure, the invested ring is placed in a humidor at 100%
humidity. If possible, the investment should not be permitted to
dry out. Rehydration of a set investment that has been stored for
an extended period may not replenish all the lost water.

Wax Elimination and Heating
The invested rings are placed in a room-temperature furnace and
heated to the prescribed maximum temperature. For gypsumbonded investments, this temperature can be either 500 °C for
the hygroscopic technique or 700 °C for the thermal expansion

CHAPTER 14

technique. With phosphate-bonded investments, the maximum
temperature setting may range from 700 to 1030 °C, depending on the type of alloy selected. The temperature setting is more
critical for gypsum-bonded investments than for the phosphate
type because the gypsum investments are more prone to thermal decomposition. During burnout, some of the melted wax
is absorbed by the investment, and residual carbon produced by
ignition of the liquid wax becomes trapped in the porous investment. It is also advisable to begin the burnout procedure while
the mold is still wet. Water trapped in the pores of the investment reduces the absorption of wax, and as the water vaporizes,
it flushes wax from the mold. This process is facilitated by placing
the ring with the sprue hole down over a slot in a ceramic tray
in the burnout furnace. When the high-heat technique is used,
the mold temperature generates enough heat to convert carbon to
either carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide. These gases can then
escape through the pores in the heated investment.

Hygroscopic Low-Heat Technique
Hygroscopic expansion of gypsum-bonded investment molds was
described earlier in this chapter. This technique obtains its compensation expansion from three sources: (1) the 37 °C water bath
expands the wax pattern, (2) the warm water entering the investment mold from the top adds some hygroscopic expansion, and
(3) the expansion at 500 °C provides the needed thermal expansion. The low-heat technique offers the advantages of less investment degradation, a cooler surface for smoother castings, and the
convenience of placing the molds directly into a preheated 500 °C
furnace. The last benefit makes it possible to keep one or more
furnaces at the burnout temperature so that molds may be put in
as they are ready. This is particularly useful in large laboratories
where molds are ready for burnout at various times. Care must
nevertheless be taken to allow enough burnout time because the
wax is more slowly oxidized (eliminated) at the lower temperature.
The molds should remain in the furnace for at least 60 minutes,
and they may be held up to 5 hours or longer with little damage.
Because the temperature of the furnace is lowered each time a
mold is placed, extra time should be allowed to ensure complete
wax elimination when molds are placed at intervals. Even though
the mold is usually held at this temperature for 60 to 90 minutes,
enough residual fine carbon may be retained to reduce the venting
of the mold. Because of this potential for reduced venting, backpressure porosity is a greater hazard in the low-heat technique
than in the high-heat technique because the investments generally
employed with the low-heat technique may be denser.
The standardized hygroscopic technique was developed for
alloys with a high gold content; the newer noble alloys may require
slightly more expansion. This added expansion may be obtained
by making one or more of the following changes:
Increasing the water bath temperature to 40 °C
Using two layers of liner
Increasing the burnout temperature to a range of 600 to
650 °C

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

315

wet liner adds a small amount of hygroscopic expansion to the
normal setting expansion.

Casting Metal in Gypsum Investments
These casting investments are relatively fragile and require the use
of a metal ring for protection during heating. The molds are usually placed in a furnace at room temperature, slowly heated to 650
to 700 °C in 60 minutes, and held for 15 to 30 minutes at the
upper temperature.
The rate of heating has some influence on the smoothness and,
in some instances, the overall dimensions of the investment. Initially, rapid heating can generate steam, which can cause flaking
or spalling of the mold walls. Too many patterns in the same plane
within the investment often cause separation of a whole section
of investment. This is because the expanding wax creates excessive
pressure over a large area.
Too rapid of a heating rate may also cause cracking of the
investment. In such a case, the outside layer of the investment
expands much more than the center sections. Consequently, the
outside layer starts to expand thermally, resulting in compressive
stress in the outside layer, which counteracts tensile stresses in
the middle regions of the mold. Such a stress distribution causes
the brittle investment to crack from the interior outward in the
form of radial cracks. These cracks, in turn, produce a casting with
fins or spines like those shown in Figure 14-14. This condition is
likely to be present with a cristobalite investment. The comparatively low inversion temperature of cristobalite and the rapid rate
of expansion during inversion make it especially important to heat
the investment slowly.
Breakdown of the dental investment and the resulting contamination and brittleness of the gold alloy casting probably occur more frequently than is generally realized. The mechanism of this investment
decomposition and alloy contamination is related to a chemical reaction between the residual carbon and calcium sulfate binder. Calcium

High-Heat Thermal Expansion Technique
This approach depends almost entirely on using a high-heat burnout to obtain the required expansion, while at the same time eliminating the wax pattern. Additional expansion results from the
slight heating of gypsum investments on setting, thus expanding
the wax pattern, and the water entering the investment from the

• Figure 14-14 Fins (arrows) on the surface of a casting that formed as a
result of cracks in the investment before casting of the metal.

316

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

sulfate per se does not decompose unless heated above 1000 °C. However, the reduction of calcium sulfate by carbon takes place rapidly
above 700 °C, in accordance with the following reactions:
CaSO4  4C CaS  4CO,
(3)
3CaSO4  CaS  4CaO  4SO2 .
(4)
This reaction takes place whenever gypsum investments are
heated above 700 °C in the presence of carbon. The sulfur dioxide
as a product of this reaction contaminates gold castings and makes
them extremely brittle. This fact emphasizes the need to eliminate
the wax during heating.
After the casting temperature has been reached, the casting
should be made immediately. Maintaining a high temperature for
a considerable length of time may result in sulfur contamination
of the casting and a rough surface on the casting because of the
disintegration of the investment. To avoid this problem, some
technicians use furnaces with heating elements on all four sides,
thereby reducing the burnout time.
Despite all these precautions and reasons for using a slow
burnout technique, the desire for rapid results has led to improved
investment formulations. A few gypsum investments, some with a
considerable amount of cristobalite, are now offered for use with
a much more rapid burnout procedure. Some suggest placing
the mold in a furnace at 315 °C for 30 minutes, and following
this with very rapid heating to the final burnout temperature. In
addition, a few investments may be placed directly into a furnace
at the final burnout temperature, held for 30 minutes, and cast.
Because of furnace design, the proximity of the mold to the heating element, and the availability of air in the muffle, the size and
smoothness may be affected. It is advisable to consider these factors carefully before a casting is made in this manner.

Casting in Phosphate Investments
Phosphate investments obtain their expansion from the following
sources:
1. Expansion of the wax pattern—This is considerable because
the setting reaction raises the mold temperature substantially.
2. Setting expansion—This is usually higher than in gypsum
investments, especially because special liquids may be used to
increase such expansion.
3. Thermal expansion—This is greater when taken to temperatures higher than those used for gypsum-bonded investments.
A total expansion of 2% or more may be required for alloys
used to produce metal-ceramic prostheses because these alloys
have higher melting and solidification temperatures. Although
phosphate investments are usually much harder and stronger than
gypsum investments, they are nevertheless quite brittle and are
subject to the same unequal expansion of adjacent sections, as
phase changes occur during heating.
The usual burnout temperatures for phosphate-bonded investments range from 750 to 1030 °C. The highest temperatures are
required for base-metal alloys. The heating rate is usually slow to
315 °C and is quite rapid thereafter, reaching completion after
a hold at the upper temperature for 30 minutes. Most burnout
furnaces are capable of being programmed for heating rates and
holding times.

The procedure for investing a wax pattern in a phosphatebonded investment is essentially the same as that for a gypsumbonded investment. As previously mentioned, the working time
can vary depending on the L/P ratio, special liquid concentration, temperature, mixing time, mixing rate, and operator skill
and experience.
As with any investment that has a high thermal expansion,
especially when marked changes in expansion or contraction
occur, it is necessary to use a slow heating rate during burnout
to prevent possible cracking or spalling. Most modern burnout
furnaces are capable of being programmed for heating rates and
holding times. For those that are not, it is advisable to use a twostage burnout, holding at 200 to 300 °C for at least 30 minutes
before completing the burnout. Recommendations for the rate of
heating vary, so it is wise to follow the instructions for the specific
investment used.
Although phosphate investments appear strong, they are still
susceptible to disrupting influences during burnout. When the
wax softens, it expands much more than does the investment.
When investing, it is desirable to leave 3 to 6 mm of investment around each pattern and to stagger the patterns if several
are placed in the same ring. Several patterns positioned along
a plane can exert tremendous pressure and fracture almost any
investment, but particularly the phosphate-bonded materials. The rapid expansion of cristobalite investment at approximately 300 °C requires slow heating to prevent fracture. After
the temperature reaches 400 °C, the rate of heating can be
safely increased. After burnout, usually at a final temperature
of 700 to 1030 °C depending on the alloy melting range, the
casting is made. The permeability of the phosphate investment
is low compared with that of a gypsum-bonded investment.
Therefore the required casting pressure is greater than that for
a gypsum mold.
Recovery and cleaning of the casting are more difficult when
a phosphate-bonded investment is used. Also, the particles usually include large grains of quartz. In some instances, such as with
gold-containing alloys, the investment adheres rather tenaciously,
usually requiring cleaning in an ultrasonic device. Neither the
phosphate binder nor the silica refractory is soluble in HCl or
H2SO4. Cold hydrofluoric acid (HF) dissolves the silica refractory
quite well without damage to a gold-based or a palladium-silver
alloy, but this acid must be used carefully with other alloys. Even
dilute HF should not be used unless the necessary neutralizing
solutions are immediately at hand and the clinician is familiar
with the correct handling techniques. Caution: once the user’s
tissues are injured, the damage cannot be reversed. Alternative
commercially available solutions can be used with greater safety.
Base-metal alloys require a light grit-blasting, usually with fine
alumina. Cobalt-chromium-based partial dentures are usually
sandblasted to remove the investment. Acid should not be used
for cleaning base-metal alloys.
The selection of the appropriate phosphate-bonded investment
must be based on the composition of the alloy to be used. Carboncontaining investments are well suited for gold-based crown and
bridge casting alloys and metal-ceramic alloys. However, if the
alloy is carbon-sensitive (such as with Ag-Pd, high-Pd, Pd-Ag, NiCr-Be, Ni-Cr, and Co-Cr alloys), a noncarbon investment should
be used.
Because the entire process involving phosphate investments
is lengthy, the demand for time-saving changes is strong. Investment manufacturers have answered this demand, resulting in
the availability of investments that can be subjected to two-stage

CHAPTER 14

heating more rapidly by being placed directly in the furnace at
the top temperature, held for 20 to 30 minutes, and then cast.
To save more time, manufacturers also offer ringless investment;
no metal ring or liner is needed. However, a reusable plastic ring
is still required during the investing procedure. The plastic ring
is tapered so that once the investment has set, it can be pushed
out of the ring, held for a specified time to ensure complete setting, and then placed directly into the hot furnace. Obviously, the
expansion on setting for this method is different from that when
a lined ring is used, and changes in overall fit must be considered.
The required expansion may be adjusted by varying the liquid
concentration.

Time Allowable for Casting
An investment contracts thermally as it cools after casting. When
the thermal expansion or high-heat technique is used, the investment loses heat after the heated ring is removed from the furnace
and the mold contracts. Because of the liner and the low thermal
conductivity of the investment, a short time can elapse before the
temperature of the mold is appreciably affected. Under average
conditions of casting, approximately 1 minute can pass without a
noticeable loss in dimension.
In the low-heat casting technique, the temperature gradient
between the investment mold and the room is not as great as
that employed with the high-heat technique. Also, the thermal
expansion of the investment is not as important to the shrinkage
compensation. However, the burnout temperature lies on a steep
portion of the thermal expansion curve rather than on a plateau
portion, as in the high-heat technique. Therefore in the low-heat

• Figure 14-15 Centrifugal casting machine, spring-wound.

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

317

casting technique, the alloy should also be cast soon after removal
of the ring from the oven; otherwise, a significant variation from
the desired casting dimensions may occur.

Casting Machines
Each casting machine must perform two essential functions: metal
melting and delivery of liquid metal to a casting ring. Metals can
be melted by torch flame, electrical resistance heating, induction
vacuum-arc, or laser beam. Liquid metal can be delivered by centrifuge, gravity, or vacuum or subjected to additional pressure to force
the alloy into the mold. The following subsections describe four
typical casting machines used in dentistry. It is important to follow
the manufacturer’s directions precisely for any of these devices.

Torch Melting/Centrifugal Casting Machine
The casting-machine spring is first wound from two to five turns
(depending on the alloy). The alloy is melted by a torch flame in a
glazed ceramic crucible attached to the “broken arm” of the casting machine (Figure 14-15). The torch flame is generated from
a gas mixture of propane and air, natural gas and air, acetylene
and air, or acetylene and oxygen. Once the metal has reached the
casting temperature and the heated casting ring is in position, the
machine is released, and the spring initiates a rotational motion.
Electrical Resistance–Heated Casting Machine
In this device, current is passed through a resistance heating coil,
melting the alloy in a graphite or ceramic crucible. The advantage of the design is that the crucible in the furnace is located
flush against the casting ring (Figure 14-16). Therefore the alloy

• Figure 14-16 Spring-wound casting machine with electrical resistance
melting furnace.

318

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

remains molten slightly longer, again ensuring that solidification
progresses completely from the tip of the casting to the button
surface.

alloys, vacuum arc heated-argon pressure casting machines are
required.

Induction Melting Machine
With this unit, the alloy is melted by an induction field that develops within a crucible surrounded by water-cooled metal tubing
(Figure 14-17). The electric induction furnace is a transformer
in which alternating current flows through the primary winding
coil and generates a variable magnetic field in the location of the
alloy to be melted in a crucible. Once the alloy reaches the casting
temperature in air or in a vacuum, it is forced into the mold by
centrifugal force, air pressure, or vacuum. Induction melting is
more commonly used with base-metal alloys.

Additional Variables Associated With Casting

Direct-Current Arc Melting Machine
The direct-current arc is produced between two electrodes in
an argon environment: the alloy and the water-cooled tungsten
electrode. The temperature within the arc exceeds 4000 °C, and
the alloy melts very quickly. However, this method poses a high
risk of overheating the alloy, and damage may result after only
a few seconds of prolonged heating. For titanium and titanium

A

Casting Crucibles
Generally, four types of casting crucibles are available: clay, carbon, quartz, and zirconia-alumina. Clay crucibles are appropriate
for many of the crown and bridge alloys, such as the high-noble
and low-noble types. Carbon crucibles can be used not only for
high-noble crown and bridge alloys but also for the higher-fusing
gold-based metal-ceramic alloys.
Crucibles made from alumina, quartz, or silica are recommended for high-fusing alloys of any type. These are especially
suited for alloys that have a high melting temperature or those that
are sensitive to carbon contamination. Crown and bridge alloys
with a high palladium content, such as palladium-silver alloys for
metal-ceramic copings and any of the nickel-based or cobalt-based
alloys, are included in this category.
Torch Melting of Noble-Metal Alloy
Noble-metal alloy is best melted by placing it on the inner sidewall
of the crucible. Thus the operator can better observe the progress
of the melting, and there is a better opportunity for any gases in
the flame to be reflected from the surface of the alloy rather than
being absorbed.
The fuel used in most instances is a mixture of natural or artificial gas and air, although oxygen and acetylene combinations
can also be used. The temperature of the gas–air flame is greatly
influenced by the nature of the gas and the proportions of gas and
air in the mixture. Care should be taken to obtain a nonluminous
brush flame with the different combustion zones clearly differentiated. Two types of flames can be obtained with a casting torch,
as shown in Figure 14-18. The air supply for the lower flame is
excessive so that incomplete combustion and a lower temperature
will result. This type of flame is likely to be favored by the beginner because the roaring sound that accompanies this flame adjustment “sounds” hot. The upper brush flame indicates the proper
adjustment for maximal efficiency and temperature.

B
• Figure 14-17 Induction melting casting machine. A, Water-cooled induction coil. B, Vertical crucible (white area) positioned within the induction coil.

• Figure 14-18 Two types of nonluminous flames showing combustion
areas. The upper flame should be employed for fusing noble-metal alloys.
The lower flame results from too much air in the mixture.

CHAPTER 14

The parts of the gas–air flame can be identified by the conical
areas in Figure 14-18. The first long cone emanating directly from
the nozzle is the zone in which the air and gas are mixed before
combustion. No heat is present in this zone. The next cone, which
is green and immediately surrounding the inner cone, is known
as the combustion zone. Here, the gas and air are partially burned.
This zone is oxidizing and should always be kept away from the
molten alloy during fusion.
The next zone, dimly blue and located just beyond the tip of
the green combustion zone, is the reducing zone. This is the hottest part of the flame, and it should be kept constantly on the
alloy during melting. The outer cone (oxidizing zone) is the area
in which combustion occurs with the oxygen in the air. Under no
circumstances should this portion of the flame be used to melt the
alloy. Not only is its temperature lower than that of the reducing
zone, but it also oxidizes the alloy.
With a little practice, the technician or clinician can readily detect whether the proper zone of the flame is in contact
with the metal by observing the condition of the alloy surface.
When the reducing zone is in contact, the surface of the gold
alloy is bright and mirrorlike, as indicated in Figure 14-19, A.
When the oxidizing portion of the flame is in contact with the
alloy, a dull film of “dross” develops over the surface, as shown
in Figure 14-19, B. Although care should be taken not to overheat the alloy, there is generally more likelihood of underheating when the gas–air flame is used. The alloy first appears to
be spongy, and then small globules of fused alloy appear. The
molten alloy soon assumes a spheroidal shape, as indicated in
Figure 14-19, A. At the proper casting temperature, the molten
alloy is light orange and tends to spin or follow the flame when
the latter is moved slightly. At this point, the alloy should be
approximately 38 to 66 °C above its liquidus temperature. The
casting should be made immediately when the proper temperature is reached. As previously discussed, various devices are also
available for melting the alloy electrically.
It is desirable to use a flux for gold crown and bridge alloys to
aid in minimizing porosity. When properly used, the flux increases
the fluidity of the alloy, and the film of flux formed on the surface of the molten alloy helps prevent oxidation, absorbs contaminants, and is left behind at the moment of casting. Reducing
fluxes containing powdered charcoal are often used, but small bits
of carbon may be carried into the mold and cause a deficiency at
a critical margin. Although such reducing fluxes are excellent for
cleaning old alloy, a better flux for the casting procedure may be
made from equal parts of fused borax powder ground with boric
acid powder. The boric acid aids in retaining the borax on the
surface of the alloy. The flux is added when the alloy is completely
melted and should be used with both old and new alloy. Old
sprues and buttons from the same alloy may be recast if they are
not contaminated.

Melting of Base Metals
Although torch melting can be used in some cases, most base
metals of Ni-Cr, Ni-Cr-Be, Co-Cr, Co-Cr-Mo, Co-Ni-Cr, commercially pure Ti, and Ti-Al-V require special melting equipment,
such as induction melting machines, vacuum melting devices,
or arc melting units. The procedures required are designed to
minimize the risk for excessive oxidation or an interaction of the
molten alloys with the recommended casting investments. It is
beyond the scope of this book to discuss these methods; the reader
is referred to specialized instruction manuals developed by the
manufacturers of these products.

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

319

A

B
• Figure 14-19 Effect of the flame zone on melting. A, A mirrorlike surface
of the metal indicates that the reducing zone of the flame is in contact with
the metal. B, A cloudy surface indicates that the oxidizing portion of the
flame is in contact with the metal surface oxidation because of improper
positioning of the torch flame.

Cleaning the Casting
When a Type 3 or 4 gold alloy has been cast and has solidified, the
ring should be quenched in water as soon as the button exhibits
a dull-red glow. Two advantages are gained in quenching: (1) the
noble-metal alloy is left in an annealed condition for burnishing,
polishing, and similar procedures (Chapter 2, Gold-Copper System), and (2) when the water contacts the hot investment, a violent reaction ensues, resulting in a soft, granular investment that
is more easily removed.
The surface of the casting often appears dark because of oxides
and tarnish. Such a surface film can be removed by a process
known as pickling, which consists of heating the discolored casting in an acid. Commonly used pickling solution for noble-metal
alloys is a 30% HCl solution. The disadvantage of HCl is that the
fumes from the acid are likely to corrode laboratory metal furnishings. In addition, these fumes are a health hazard and should be
vented via a fume hood. However, the pickling process can be
performed ultrasonically while the prosthesis is sealed in a Teflon

320

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

container. Commercial products based on phosphoric acid, sulfamic acid, and other acids are also available for pickling noblemetal prostheses.
The best method for pickling is to place the casting in a test
tube or dish and pour the acid over it. It may be necessary to
heat the acid, but boiling should be avoided because of the considerable amount of acid fumes involved. After pickling, the acid
is poured off, and the casting is removed. The pickling solution
should be renewed frequently because it is likely to become contaminated after reusing the solution several times.
In no case should the casting be held with metallic tongs,
which can contaminate the casting when both the casting and the
tongs are in contact in the pickling solution. The pickling solution
usually contains small amounts of copper dissolved from previous
castings. When the metallic tongs contact this electrolyte, a small
galvanic cell is created, and copper may be deposited on the casting at the point where the tongs grip it. This copper deposition
extends into the alloy and is a future source for discoloration in
the area.
Gold- and palladium-based metal-ceramic alloys, and basemetal alloys, are generally not pickled if they are to be benchcooled to room temperature before the casting is removed from
the investment.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is the marginal fit of cast crowns on a prepared tooth essential to the
long-term clinical success of metal prostheses?

Clinical Evaluation of Casting Fit
Dental castings can be produced in any size (from a denture base
to the smallest inlay). The procedures employed for the construction of small restorations, such as inlays, onlays, crowns,
and endodontic posts, are the primary topic of this chapter. The
fundamental principles are the same, regardless of the size of the
casting, and the techniques differ only in sprue design, type of
investment, and method of melting the alloy.
The casting process is designed to provide a metallic duplication of missing tooth structure, with as much accuracy as
possible. The tolerance limits for the fit and marginal adaptation of a cast restoration are not known. In a clinical study,
10 experienced dentists were asked to evaluate the marginal
adaptation of a group of inlays, using a sharp dental explorer
and radiographs. After the cemented restorations were graded,
they were microscopically measured at the marginal openings
of various areas. For “acceptable” restorations, the mean opening was 21 μm at the occlusal surface and 74 μm at the gingival region, which is not as accessible visually. There was little
agreement among these 10 dentists on the acceptability of the
marginal openings when evaluated by either dental explorers
or radiographs.
The difficulty in detecting small discrepancies at the margins
of cemented restorations is associated with the use of sharp dental explorers that have a relatively large radius of curvature at
the tip compared with the width of margin gaps that are being
evaluated. As shown in Figure 14-20, the tip of this unused new
explorer may not “catch” a 60-μm margin gap, whose width is
the diameter of a human hair, as it traverses along a path perpendicular to the gap. If this explorer tip substantially penetrates a
gap during probing, the fit of a crown, inlay, or onlay will not be

• Figure 14-20 Cross section of an unused dental explorer tip (top) and
a 60-μm hair (×25). (From McLean JW, van Fraunhofer JA: The estimation
of cement film thickness by an in vivo technique, Br Dent J 131:107–111,
1971.)

clinically acceptable. This illustration poses the question of how
readily a hairline gap can be detected by running an explorer
over the margins of the restoration, especially in interdental areas
that must often be probed at a small angle to the surface. It is
obvious that the accuracy of the inlay or crown should be greater
than can be detected by the eye or by the conventional methods
of clinical testing. At the margins of the cemented restoration, a
thin line of cement is always present, even though it may not be
readily visible. Except for resin-based luting materials, the present dental cements are somewhat soluble and can deteriorate in
the oral cavity over time. Thus the less accurate the casting fit
and the greater the amount of cement exposed, the more likely
it is that the cement will degrade. Certainly, a high degree of
accuracy in marginal adaptation of 25 μm or less cannot be guaranteed for all cast restorations. It stands to reason that the more
accurate the fit of the casting, the less the likelihood of leakage,
plaque accumulation on the cement, and secondary caries will
develop later.
Assuming that the wax pattern is satisfactory, the procedure
then becomes a matter of enlarging the mold uniformly and sufficiently to compensate for the thermal casting shrinkage of the
alloy. Theoretically, if the shrinkages of the wax and the alloy are
known, the mold can be expanded enough to compensate for
such shrinkage. Unfortunately, there are variables in the behavior
of the materials and the wax that cannot be precisely controlled.
The overall dimensional accuracy possible with current techniques has not been clearly defined. Thus neither the allowable
tolerance of accuracy in the fit of the casting nor that obtainable
during the casting procedure is known. In the final analysis, the
casting procedure is partly empirical, and previous experience is
very beneficial.
There are many steps in the procedure for which a considerable number of facts are known. In addition, certain variations in
the techniques described here produce equally satisfactory results.
However, any technique involves strict adherence to certain fundamental principles common to all metals. These are the fundamentals emphasized in the following discussion.

CHAPTER 14

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

321

imperfections, such as nodules, that are not characteristic of
the entire surface area. Excessive roughness or irregularities on
the outer surface of the casting necessitate additional finishing
and polishing.
Even under optimal conditions, the surface roughness of the
casting is invariably somewhat greater than that of the wax pattern. The difference is probably related to the particle size of the
investment, and its ability to reproduce the wax pattern in microscopic detail. With proper manipulative techniques, normal
increased roughness in the casting should not be a major factor
in dimensional accuracy. However, improper technique can lead
to a marked increase in roughness and to the formation of surface
irregularities.

• Figure 14-21 Localized shrinkage porosity in the pontic of a three-unit
fixed partial denture caused by delayed solidification and lack of a chill-set
sprue.

Causes of Defective Castings
Seldom is a defect in a casting attributable to factors other than
the carelessness or ignorance of the operator. With present techniques, casting failures should be the exception, not the rule.
Defects in castings can be classified under four headings: (1)
distortion, (2) surface roughness and irregularities, (3) porosity
(Figure 14-21), and (4) incomplete or missing detail. In almost
every instance, defects in castings can be avoided by strict observance of procedures governed by certain fundamental rules and
principles.

Distortion
Any marked distortion of the casting is probably related to a distortion of the wax pattern, as described in Chapter 13, Manipulation of Inlay Wax. The setting and hygroscopic expansions of the
investment may produce a nonuniform expansion of the walls of
the pattern. The gingival margins are forced apart by the mold
expansion, whereas the solid occlusal bar of wax resists expansion
during the early stages of setting. Therefore distortion increases
as the thickness of the pattern decreases. As would be expected,
the lower the setting expansion of the investment, the less the distortion. Generally, this is not a serious problem, but it accounts
for some of the unexplained inaccuracies that may occur in small
castings.

Surface Roughness, Irregularities, and
Discoloration
Surface roughness is defined as finely spaced surface imperfections whose height, width, and direction establish the predominant surface pattern. Surface irregularities are isolated

Air Voids
Small nodules on a casting are caused by air bubbles that become
attached to the pattern during or subsequent to the investing procedure. Such nodules can sometimes be removed if they are not
in a critical area. However, for nodules on margins or on internal
surfaces, the removal of these irregularities might alter the fit of the
casting. As previously noted, the best method to avoid air bubbles
is to use the vacuum investing technique. A wetting agent may be
helpful in preventing the collection of air bubbles on the pattern
surface, but it is by no means a certain remedy. As previously discussed, it is important that the wetting agent be applied in a thin
layer. It is best to air-dry the wetting agent because any excess liquid
dilutes the investment, possibly producing surface irregularities on
the casting.
Water Films
If the wax pattern is slightly moved, jarred, or vibrated after
investing or the painting of the investment does not result in intimate contact of the investment with the pattern, a water film may
form irregularly over the surface. Occasionally, this type of surface
irregularity appears as minute ridges or veins if the investment
becomes separated from the wax pattern.
Liquid/Powder Ratio
The higher the L/P ratio, the rougher the casting. However, if too
little water is used, the investment may be unmanageably thick so
that it cannot be properly applied to the pattern. Air voids may
not be sufficiently removed by vacuum investing.
Foreign Bodies
A rough crucible former with investment debris clinging to it may
roughen the investment on its removal so that bits of investment
are carried into the mold with the molten alloy. Contamination
usually results not only in surface roughness but also in incomplete areas or surface voids.
Surface discoloration and roughness can result from sulfur contamination. An example of this effect may be seen in Figure 14-22,
either from investment breakdown at elevated temperatures or
from a high sulfur content of the torch flame.
Impact of Molten Alloy on the Mold Wall
Occasionally, the molten alloy may fracture or abrade the mold
surface on impact, regardless of its bulk. Abrasion on the mold is
reflected as a raised area on the casting that can prevent complete
seating of the casting. A proper sprue to prevent the direct impact
of the molten metal, at an angle of 90 degrees to the investment
surface, reduces damage to the investment surface, and undesirable turbulence is avoided.

322

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Pattern Position
When several patterns are invested in the same ring, they should
not be placed too close together. The expansion of wax patterns
before the investment sets can bring the patterns too close.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can the risk of porosity and incomplete castings be minimized?

Porosity
Porosity may occur within the interior region of a casting that
weakens the casting and extends to the external surface as roughness, which may also cause discoloration. There are two sources of
porosity: solidification defects and trapped gases.
Continual feeding of molten metal through the sprue must
occur to make up for the shrinkage of metal volume during solidification. If the sprue freezes in its cross section before this flow is
completed, a localized shrinkage void will occur in the last portion
of the casting that solidifies.
Four types of porosities are shown in Figure 14-23, A & B: (1)
localized shrinkage porosity, (2) microporosity, (3) pinhole porosity, and (4) subsurface porosity. Localized shrinkage generally

• Figure 14-22 A black-coated noble-metal alloy casting resulting from
sulfur contamination or oxidation during alloy melting.

A

B

occurs near the sprue–casting junction, but it may occur anywhere
between dendrites, as shown in Figure 14-23, C, where the last
part of the casting to solidify was between the dendrite branches
as they developed.
Many alloys dissolve or occlude gases while they are molten.
For example, both copper and silver dissolve oxygen in large
amounts in the liquid state. Molten platinum and palladium
have an affinity for hydrogen and oxygen. On solidification, the
absorbed gases are expelled, and pinhole porosity results. The
larger voids may also result from the same cause but also from gas
that is mechanically trapped by the molten metal in the mold or
by gas that is incorporated during the casting procedure. Larger
spherical porosities can also be caused by gas occluded from a
poorly adjusted torch flame or by the use of the mixing or oxidizing zones of the flame rather than the reducing zone. If the alloy
has been used before, these types of porosities can be minimized
by premelting the gold alloy in a graphite crucible or on a graphite
block and correctly adjusting and positioning the torch flame during melting. The porosity that extends to the surface is usually in
the form of small pinpoint holes. When the surface is polished,
additional pinholes are uncovered.
Subsurface porosity occurs on occasion, as shown in Figure
14-23, B. The reasons for such voids are not well understood.
They may be caused by the simultaneous nucleation of solid grains
and gas bubbles at the first moment that the alloy freezes at the
mold walls. This type of porosity can be diminished by controlling
the rate at which the molten metal enters the mold.
Suck-back porosity may also occur externally, usually in the
interior of a crown near the area of the sprue, if a hot spot has
been created by the molten metal impinging from the sprue channel on a point of the mold wall. This hot spot causes the local
region to solidify last and results in suck-back porosity, as shown
in Figure 14-24 (left). Suck-back porosity often occurs at an occlusoaxial line angle or incisoaxial line angle that is not well rounded.
This type of porosity defect can be eliminated by flaring the point
of sprue attachment and reducing the mold–melt temperature
differential—that is, lowering the casting temperature by about
30 °C. Such a result is shown on the right side of Figure 14-24.
Entrapped air bubbles on the inner surface of the casting,
sometimes referred to as back-pressure porosity, can produce large
concave depressions such as those seen in Figure 14-25. This is
caused by the inability of the air in the mold to escape through the
pores in the investment or by the pressure gradient that displaces
the air pocket toward the end of the investment via the molten

C

• Figure 14-23 Localized porosities. A, Microporosity, pinhole porosity, and gas inclusions. Microporosity
voids are irregular in shape, whereas the two other types tend to be spherical; the largest spherical voids
are gas inclusions. B, Subsurface porosity. C, Localized shrinkage porosity. (Courtesy G. Ryge.)

CHAPTER 14

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

323

• Figure 14-24 Examples of suck-back porosity (arrows on the left image). The coping on the left was cast at 1370 °C. The coping on the right
side was cast at 1340 °C. (Courtesy Dr. J. Nielsen.)

• Figure 14-25 Surface irregularity on the cavity side of a casting caused
by back-pressure porosity.

• Figure 14-26 A, Grain structure of an as-cast American Dental Association (ADA) type III noble-metal alloy. B, Same alloy after a homogenization heat treatment at 725 °C for 70 minutes. Pinhole porosity is visible.
(Courtesy B. Hedegard.)

sprue and button. The incidence of entrapped air can be increased
by the use of the dense modern investments.
All castings probably contain a certain amount of porosity, as
exemplified by the photomicrographs shown in Figure 14-26. This
should be minimized because it may adversely affect the physical
properties of the casting. Proper burnout, an adequate mold and
casting temperature, a sufficiently high casting pressure, and a
proper investment L/P ratio can minimize or eliminate entrappedair porosity. It is good practice to make sure that the thickness of
investment between the tip of the pattern and the end of the ring
is not greater than 6 mm (Figure 14-2).

Incomplete Casting
Occasionally, the molten alloy may be prevented from completely
filling the mold because of insufficient venting of the mold and
high viscosity of the melted metal.
Insufficient venting is directly related to the back pressure
exerted by the air in the mold. These failures are usually exemplified by rounded, incomplete margins (Figure 14-27). If the air

• Figure 14-27 Rounded, incomplete margins are evidence of insufficient
casting pressure.

324

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Investment

Casting

Metal

• Figure 14-28 An incomplete casting resulting from incomplete wax
elimination is characterized by rounded margins and a shiny appearance.
Discrepancy

cannot be vented quickly through the investment, the molten
alloy cannot fill the mold before it solidifies. The magnitude of the
casting pressure should be suspected. Casting pressure should be
maintained a few seconds longer to prevent back pressure during
the early stage of solidification.
Residues from incomplete elimination of wax or plastic sprue
may fill the pores in the investment so that the air cannot be vented
completely. An example of a casting failure caused by incomplete
wax elimination is shown in Figure 14-28 and shown schematically in Figure 14-29. Compared with Figure 14-27, the shining
appearance of Figure 14-28 is caused by the strong reducing atmosphere of carbon monoxide left by residual wax.
Casting alloys exhibit varying viscosities and surface tensions
in the molten state, depending on composition and temperature. Both the surface tension and the viscosity of a molten alloy
decrease with temperature increases. Therefore the temperature of
the alloy should be raised higher than its liquidus temperature so
that its viscosity and surface tension are reduced so that the metal
does not solidify prematurely as it enters the mold.

Suggested Readings
Earnshaw R: The effect of casting ring liners on the potential expansion
of a gypsum-bonded investment, J Dent Res 67:1366–1370, 1988.
Total expansion, setting expansion, and thermal expansion of the
investment setting against a smooth dry surface was 1.7%; against
a dry ceramic liner, 1.6% to 1.7%; and against wet cellulose or wet
asbestos, 2.2% to 2.3%. The ceramic liner can be used wet if it is
treated with a surfactant instead of water.
Ito M, Yamagishi T, Oshida Y, et al: Effect of selected physical properties of waxes on investments and casting shrinkage, J Prosthet Dent
75:211–216, 1996.
This study evaluated the relationship between properties of paraffin and dental inlay waxes to casting shrinkage when patterns were
invested with a phosphate-bonded investment. Casting shrinkage
decreased as the flow of the wax pattern increased. If a low-flow
wax or thick pattern is used, the size of the casting ring should be
increased.
Jorgensen KD, Ono T: Distortion of wax crowns, Scand J Dent Res
92:253–256, 1984.
Distortion of wax crowns is enough to reduce the fit of the final
restoration to a degree that is clinically unacceptable. This study

• Figure 14-29 Schematic illustration of an incomplete casting.

Other Causes
Certain surface discolorations and roughness may not be evident when the casting is completed but may appear during
service. For example, various gold alloys—such as brazing
alloys (solders), bits of wire, and mixtures of different casting
alloys—should never be melted together and reused for patient
castings. The resulting mixture would form different phases
that do not possess the proper physical properties needed and
might form a eutectic phase with low corrosion resistance and
discoloration.

suggests that wax pattern distortion may be minimized only by use of
a pattern/die investing technique.
Neiman R, Sarma AC: Setting and thermal reactions of phosphate investments, J Dent Res 59:1478–1485, 1980.
The authors concluded that setting took place through the complex
formation of [NH4MgPO4.6H2O]n, excess reactants, and water, and
that dehydration and thermal reactions led to a sequence of reactions resulting in the formation of [NH4MgPO4.H2O], [Mg2P2O7]n,
Mg2P2O7, and Mg3[PO4]2.
Nomura GT, Reisbick MH, Preston JD: An investigation of epoxy resin
dies, J Prosthet Dent 44:45–50, 1980.
In a comparison of three epoxy die materials with a type IV stone,
full crown epoxy dies were undersized, MOD onlay resin dies were
accurate, and detail reproduction was found to be comparable to the
type IV gypsum. However, only one epoxy material had a hardness
approaching that of the dental stone.
Pieralini AR, Benjamin CM, Ribeiro RF, et al: The effect of coating patterns with spinel-based investment on the castability and porosity of
titanium cast into three phosphate-bonded investments, J Prosthodont
19:517–522, 2010.
The results show that investing technique with coating increased the
castability for all phosphate-bonded investments.

CHAPTER 14

Santos JF, Ballester RY: Delayed hygroscopic expansion of phosphatebonded investments, Dent Mater 3:165–167, 1987.
Delayed hygroscopic expansion occurs when the investment is
immersed in water after setting. Increased time of immersion and an
increase in the special liquid concentration increased the hygroscopic
setting expansion.
Taggart WH: A new and accurate method of making gold inlays, Dent
Cosmos 49:1117–1121, 1907.
The dental “lost wax” process was developed by Taggart, opening the
opportunity to cast accurate restorations in an investment mold.
Tourah A, Moshaverinia A, Chee WW: Effects of setting under air pressure on the number of surface pores and irregularities of dental investment materials, J Prosthet Dent 111:150–153, 2014.

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

325

Specimens set under positive pressure in a pressure chamber presented fewer surface bubbles than specimens set under atmospheric
pressure. Positive pressure is effective and, therefore, is recommended for both gypsum-bonded and phosphate-bonded investment materials.
Zeltser C, Lewinstein I, Grajower R: Fit of crown wax patterns after
removal from the die, J Prosthet Dent 53:344–346, 1985.
The effects of loading wax patterns before investment was determined. Repetitive loading revealed that the plastic deformation in
wax was less after the second loading than after the first cycle for a
specific load.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Christensen GJ: Marginal fit of gold inlay castings, J Prosthet Dent
16:297–305, 1966.
In this laboratory study, 10 dentists accepted cemented gold inlays
with a mean occlusal margin opening of 21 μm [range of 2 to 51 μm],
a mean proximal margin opening of 26 μm [range of 9 to 34 μm], and
a gingival margin opening of 74 μm [range of 34 to 119 μm]. Explorer
examination of visually accessible areas was superior to either explorer
or radiographic examination of visually inaccessible areas.
Cooney JP, Caputo AA: Type III gold alloy complete crowns cast
in a phosphate-bonded investment, J Prosthet Dent 46:414–419,
1981.
Marginal fit was superior for castings made in phosphate-bonded
investment; surface roughness was less when cast in the gypsumbonded investment.
Da Silva LJ, Leal MB, Valente MLC, et al: Effect of casting atmosphere
on the marginal deficiency and misfit of Ni-Cr alloys with and without beryllium, J Prosthet Dent 118:83–88, 2017.
Four casting conditions were investigated: flame-torch, induction/
argon, induction/air, and induction/vacuum. The results demonstrated that beryllium-containing alloys cast in an argon atmosphere
exhibited reduced marginal deficiency, and improved marginal adaptation could also be achieved by the torch technique.
Dootz ER, Asgar K: Solidification patterns of single crowns and threeunit bridge castings, Quint Dent Technol 10:299–305, 1986.
Solidification rates and patterns differed for type III gold alloy and a
palladium-silver alloy. The gold alloy solidified in a random pattern,
whereas the palladium-silver metal-ceramic alloy solidified in a unidirectional manner.
Eames WB, O’Neal SJ, Monteiro J, et al: Techniques to improve the seating of castings, J Am Dent Assoc 96:432–437, 1978.
Die spacing was the most suitable method to compensate for casting variables and to ensure improved marginal adaptation while also
increasing retention by 25%.
Earnshaw R: The effect of casting ring liners on the potential expansion of a gypsum-bonded investment, J Dent Res 67:1366–1370,
1988.
Total expansion, setting expansion, and thermal expansion of the
investment setting against a smooth dry surface was 1.7%; against
a dry ceramic liner, 1.6% to 1.7%; and against wet cellulose or wet
asbestos, 2.2% to 2.3%. The ceramic liner can be used wet if it is
treated with a surfactant instead of water.
Finger W: Effect of the setting expansion of dental stone upon the die
precision, Scand J Dent Res 88:159–160, 1980.
The addition of potassium sulfate and borax to type IV gypsums
reduced setting expansion without affecting the physical properties.
Finger W, Ohsawa M: Accuracy of cast restorations produced by a
refractory die-investing technique, J Prosthet Dent 52:800–803,
1984.
By minimizing distortion of the wax pattern, the refractory dieinvesting procedure can produce consistently accurate cast gold alloy
restorations.
Hansen P: Predictable casting for dimensional shrinkage of fast-cast postand-cores, Oper Dent 39:367–373, 2014.
The use of a phosphate investment with an accelerated technique was
found to produce consistent and predictable shrinkage of cast postand-cores.
Haralur SB, Hamdi OA, Al-Shahrani AA, et al: The effect of casting ring
liner length and prewetting on the marginal adaptation and dimensional accuracy of full crown castings, J Int Soc Prev Community Dent
7:52–57, 2017.
This study shows that the dry cellulose ring liners provides better marginal adaptation in comparison to prewet cellulose ring liners, and
accurate cuspal height was obtained with shorter ring liner in comparison to full-length cellulose ring liners.

Ito M, Kuroiwa A, Nagasawa S, et al: Effect of wax melting range and
investment liquid concentration on the accuracy of a three-quarter
crown casting, J Prosthet Dent 87:57–61, 2002.
Two phosphate-bonded investment mixtures were prepared: 100%
special liquid and 75% special liquid. Casting shrinkage was smaller
with the use of 100% special liquid. The casting shrinkage increased
when waxes with a higher softening temperature were used.
Ito M, Yamagishi T, Oshida Y, et al: Effect of selected physical properties of waxes on investments and casting shrinkage, J Prosthet
Dent 75:211–216, 1996.
This study evaluated the relationship between properties of paraffin and dental inlay waxes to casting shrinkage when patterns were
invested with a phosphate-bonded investment. Casting shrinkage
decreased as the flow of the wax pattern increased. If a low-flow wax or
thick pattern is used, the size of the casting ring should be increased.
Jorgensen KD, Okamoto A: Restraining factors affecting setting expansion of phosphate-bonded investments, Scand J Dent Res 94:178–181,
1986.
The authors suggest that setting expansion is a highly unreliable means
to compensate partially for the thermal contraction of casting alloys.
Jorgensen KD, Ono T: Distortion of wax crowns, Scand J Dent Res
92:253–256, 1984.
Distortion of wax crowns is enough to reduce the fit of the final restoration to a degree that is clinically unacceptable. This study suggests
that wax pattern distortion may be minimized only by use of a pattern/die investing technique.
Junner RE, Stevens L: Anisotropic setting expansion of phosphatebonded investment, Aust Dent J 31:434–439, 1986
In this study, the vertical setting expansion was significantly greater than
the horizontal expansion in a rigid ring with liners. A flexible ring offered
little restriction to horizontal expansion, reducing mold distortion.
Kalavathi M, Sachin B, Prasanna BG: Accuracy of castings fabricated with
ringless casting investment system and metal ring casting investment
system: A comparative study, J Contemp Dent Pract 17:165–170, 2016.
The study shows that ringless casting technique had produced better
marginal accuracy compared with conventional casting technique.
Kanitkar AA, Kanitkar AS, Sasane RS, et al: Analyse the effect of different investment techniques and pattern materials on surface roughness
of raw Ni-Cr castings—an in vitro study, J Indian Prosthodont Soc
20:97–103, 2020.
Wax patterns and resin patterns invested under increased pressure
produce smoother casting surface than those invested at atmospheric
pressure.
Kaplan J, Newman SM: Accuracy of the divestment casting technique,
Oper Dent 8:82–87, 1983.
These investigators found that castings made using the divestment
procedure fit more accurately than did castings made using a
conventional stone-die and gypsum-bonded refractory investment
technique.
Lautenschlager EP, Harcourt JK, Ploszaj LC: Setting reaction of gypsum
materials investigated by x-ray diffraction, J Dent Res 48:43–48, 1969
An early study of the conversion from calcium sulfate hemihydrate to
calcium sulfate dihydrate.
Leal MB, Pagnano VO, Bezzon OL: Effect of investment type and mold
temperature on casting accuracy and titanium-ceramic bond, Braz
Dent J 24:40–46, 2013.
For casting accuracy, expressed by marginal deficiency in micron, there
is a difference between investment materials used, and the increase
in temperature resulted in different effects for the tested investments.
Mackert JR, Jr: An expert system for analysis of casting failures, Int J
Prosthodont 1:268–280, 1988.
An expert system was proposed for the diagnosis of common lost-wax
casting problems, based on an interactive consultation session at a
PC station, during which the user answered questions about defective
castings. The computer responded with conclusions on the most likely
cause of each problem.

325.e1

Mahler DB, Ady AB: An explanation for the hygroscopic setting expansion of dental gypsum products, J Dent Res 39:578, 1960.
A classic publication on the theory of hygroscopic setting expansion.
An excellent reference for those interested in the mechanics of this
phenomenon.
Martin KH: An investigation of the effect of the water/powder ratio on the
accuracy of the fit of gold alloy castings, Aust Dent J 1:202–203, 1956.
Use of the correct water/powder ratio with a gypsum investment is
essential to obtain a good fit of castings, especially when the low-heat
technique is used.
Matsuya S, Yamane M: Decomposition of gypsum-bonded investments,
J Dent Res 60:1418–1423, 1981.
At 900 °C, decomposition of gypsum-bonded investments occurred,
leading to the formation of CaSiO3 and Ca2SiO4.
Mueller HJ, Reyes W, McGill S: Surfactant-containing phosphate investment, Dent Mater 2:42–44, 1986.
The addition of surfactants in a phosphate-bonded casting investment
can increase the hygroscopic setting expansion. The surfactant also makes
the unset investment more viscous and reduces the compressive strength.
Naylor WP, Moore BK, Phillips RW: A topographical assessment of casting ring liners using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Quint Dent
Technol 11:413–420, 1987.
Three types of nonasbestos ring liners exist: ceramic, cellulose, and a
ceramic-cellulose combination. A liner containing an aluminosilicate
component has the potential to produce respirable-size ceramic particles.
Neiman R, Sarma AC: Setting and thermal reactions of phosphate
investments, J Dent Res 59:1478–1485, 1980.
The authors concluded that setting took place through the complex
formation of [NH4MgPO4.6H2O]n, excess reactants, and water, and
that dehydration and thermal reactions led to a sequence of reactions resulting in the formation of [NH4MgPO4.H2O], [Mg2P2O7]n,
Mg2P2O7, and Mg3[PO4]2.
Nielsen JP: Pressure distribution in centrifugal dental casting, J Dent Res
57:261–269, 1978.
This article discusses the factors contributing to the pressure gradient that
develops along the length of a casting in a centrifugal casting machine.
Nielsen JP, Ollerman R: Suck-back porosity, Quint Dent Technol 1:61–65,
1976.
Using a gold-palladium-silver alloy with different sprue former
lengths, diameters, and angles of attachment, lower casting temperature and flaring of the sprue former reduced suck-back porosity. The
authors postulated that a “hot spot” is created in the mold that causes
this type of porosity.
Nomura GT, Reisbick MH, Preston JD: An investigation of epoxy resin
dies, J Prosthet Dent 44:45–50, 1980.
In a comparison of three epoxy die materials with a type IV stone,
full crown epoxy dies were undersized, MOD onlay resin dies were
accurate, and detail reproduction was found to be comparable to the
type IV gypsum. However, only one epoxy material had a hardness
approaching that of the dental stone.
Otun A, Lee H, Geminiani A, et al: Ring liner and burn-out temperature affect the clinical time required to fit a cast post, J Prosthet Dent
102:224–228, 2009.
Investing a post pattern without a ring liner and setting a lower final
burn-out temperature yield cast posts that require significantly less
adjustment time for clinical placement.
Pieralini AR, Benjamin CM, Ribeiro RF, et al: The effect of coating patterns with spinel-based investment on the castability and
porosity of titanium cast into three phosphate-bonded investments, J Prosthodont 19:517–522, 2010.
The results show that investing technique with coating increased the
castability for all phosphate-bonded investments.

325.e2

Prasad R, Al-Keraif AA, Kathuria N, et al: Accuracy of ringless casting
and accelerated wax-elimination technique: a comparative in vitro
study, J Prosthodont 23:157–162, 2014.
The ringless investment technique can produce castings with higher
accuracy and can be favorably combined with the accelerated waxelimination method.
Saber FS, Abolfazli N, Mahboub F, et al: The effect of occlusal surface
relief of dies on marginal adaptation of metal-ceramic casting copings,
J Prosthodont 22:287–291, 2013.
Leaving the occlusal part of the die uncovered with the die spacer
during investing procedure improved the crown seating considerably
in the occlusal surface, as well as shoulder and bevel margins.
Santos JF, Ballester RY: Delayed hygroscopic expansion of phosphatebonded investments, Dent Mater 3:165–167, 1987.
Delayed hygroscopic expansion occurs when the investment is
immersed in water after setting. Increased time of immersion and an
increase in the special liquid concentration increased the hygroscopic
setting expansion.
Smith CT, Diefenderfer KE: A direct refractory die technique for cast
gold restorations, Oper Dent 42:122–132, 2017.
This article demonstrates a laboratory technique in which the final
restoration is cast directly on the refractory die without removing the
wax pattern.
Steinbock AF: An overview of dental waxes, Dental Lab News, 1989 50
July.
Stevens L: The effect of early heating on the expansion of a phosphatebonded investment, Aust Dent J 28:366–369, 1983.
The thermal expansion of a phosphate-bonded investment decreased
as heating was delayed from 1 to 6 hours after mixing. The setting
expansion increased as the special liquid replaced water for mixing.
Taggart WH: A new and accurate method of making gold inlays, Dent
Cosmos 49:1117–1121, 1907.
The dental “lost wax” process was developed by Taggart, opening the
opportunity to cast accurate restorations in an investment mold.
Tourah A, Moshaverinia A, Chee WW: Effects of setting under
air pressure on the number of surface pores and irregularities
of dental investment materials, J Prosthet Dent 111:150–153,
2014.
Specimens set under positive pressure in a pressure chamber presented fewer surface bubbles than specimens set under atmospheric
pressure. Positive pressure is effective and, therefore, is recommended for both gypsum-bonded and phosphate-bonded investment materials.
Vaidyanathan TK, Schulman A, Nielsen JP, et al: Correlation between
macroscopic porosity location and liquid metal pressure in centrifugal
casting technique, J Dent Res 60:59–66, 1981.
Radiographic analysis revealed that the porosity is dependent on the
location at which the sprue is attached to the casting. The location
of the macroscopic porosity, at portions of the casting close to the
free surface of the button, is dependent on the pressure gradient
and therefore different heat transfer rates in different portions of
the casting.
Verrett RG, Duke ES: The effect of sprue attachment design on castability
and porosity, J Prosthet Dent 61:418–424, 1989.
Flared and straight sprue attachments optimized castability and minimized porosity.
Zeltser C, Lewinstein I, Grajower R: Fit of crown wax patterns after
removal from the die, J Prosthet Dent 53:344–346, 1985.
The effects of loading wax patterns before investment was determined. Repetitive loading revealed that the plastic deformation in
wax was less after the second loading than after the first cycle for a
specific load.

15

Digital Technology in Dentistry

C
OH
UA
TP
L ITNEER O U T L I N E
Outline
IntraoralLevel
Digital
One
Scanner
Outline Level
Prototyping
ToolsTwo
Outline Level Two Outline Two
Outline Level 3
K E Y Outline
TERM
Level
S3

Outline
Diagnostic
Level
Systems
One Level One
TheOutline
Future Level Two Outline Two
Outline Level Two
Outline Level 3
Outline Level 3

Additive manufacturing (AM) A process of constructing objects
where material is incrementally added according to a computerK Eaided
Y T design
E R M (CAD)
S file; also known as three-dimensional (3-D)
keyprinting.
term this the is defininition of the key term that precedes this
Augmented
the is defininition
reality (AR)
of theAkey
form
term
of virtual
that precedes
reality in which interactkeying
this
with
thethe
is defininition
real world isofthrough
the key simulation.
term
key
Computer-aided
term this thedesign
is defininition
(CAD) of
A computer
the key term
technology
that precedes
that this
the
designs
is defininition
an object of
and
the
creates
key term
a computer
that precedes
file for manufacture
keyofterm
the design.
defininition of the key term that precedes this the is
Computer-aided
defininition of the
manufacturing
key term that(or
precedes
milling) (CAM) The use of
software and computer-controlled machinery to automate a
manufacturing process.
Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) An x-ray threedimensional (3-D) imaging technology in which the radiation is
divergent and forms a cone.
Digital An electronic technology that records or stores information in the form of binary digits (i.e., 1 and 0) or technology
characterized by electronic and computerized devices (e.g.,
digital images).
Digital impression A virtual scan (digital model) of a patient’s
dentition and other structures that is generated with laser or

other optical scanning devices and converted into a digital
format.
Fused deposition modeling (FDM) A three-dimensional (3-D)
term
printing
a short
process
definition
thatto
uses
follow
a continuous filament of a thermokeyplastic
term material;
this the isalso
defininition
known asoffused
the key
filament
term fabrication
that precedes
(FFF)
this
or
the
filament
is defininition
freeform fabrication.
of the key term that precedes
key
Prototyping
this the isThe
defininition
creation,of
modification,
the key termand optimization of twokeydimensional
term this the
or is
three-dimensional
defininition of themodels
key term
of objects,
that precedes
whichthis
may
the
be the
is defininition
final desired
ofobject
the key
orterm
an interim
that precedes
object for examination
of fit.
Quantitative light-induced fluorescence (QLF) A nondestructive
diagnostic method for the detection and assessment of early
carious lesions.
Subtractive manufacturing (SM) A process of making 3D
objects by successively removing material from a solid block
of metal, ceramic, polymer, or composite using computeraided standard machining processes, such as turning, drilling
or milling.
Virtual reality (VR) A computer-generated simulation that allows
for interactive experiences.

Digital dentistry is the use of dental technologies or devices that
incorporate digital or computer-controlled components to carry
out dental procedures rather than using materials and mechanical
or electrical tools. The use of digital dentistry can make carrying out
dental procedures more efficient than the use of mechanical tools.
A variety of digital devices, such as intraoral and facial scanners,
cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT), software for computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-aided manufacturing
(or milling) (CAM), and three-dimensional (3-D) printing provide
new potential alternatives to replace the manual tasks and improve
the quality of care and patient experiences. These technologies have
several advantages, including accurate and time-saving measurement, electronic storage, and file transmission to automate processes.

Intraoral Digital Scanner

CRITICAL QUESTION
How are digital impressions made, and what are their applications in
dentistry?

326

Intraoral scanner/cameras, similar in size to a dental mirror, are
able to show tooth surfaces in 3-D rather than two-dimensional
(2-D) photographic images. Such cameras are used in the dental
office, without the help of a dental technician. The clear images
enable color matching, diagnostic tasks, orthodontic and implant
placement, and digital impressions.

Digital Impressions
Intraoral scanners use light to create accurate 3-D records of the
dental arches, using only a beam of infrared light, that are digitally
recorded. Such digital impressions almost instantly re-create the
positive impression of a patient’s dentition and other structures in a
digital format. In contrast, conventional impressions require placing
a tray of impression material over the dental arches to create an intaglio of the dentition, from which a positive model must be made.

CHAPTER 15

Digital impression techniques are a clinically acceptable alternative
to conventional impression methods in the fabrication of crowns and
short fixed dental prostheses (FDPs) and implant-supported crowns.
Digital impressions are faster, are more comfortable for patients, and
shorten chair time. However, digital impressions are currently less
accurate for full-mouth and edentulous-jaw impressions.

Color Matching
A physical shade guide is the traditional means of matching a
patient’s teeth to restorative materials. However, differences often
occur in shade matching as a result of variations among observers
(dentist, technician, patient) and sources of illumination. Digital
cameras have improved both dental laboratory communication
and patient satisfaction. Such images are needed for the selection
of materials, as discussed in the CAM section that follows.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What is prototyping?
What are subtractive and additive processes, and what are their relative
advantages and disadvantages?

Prototyping Tools
Prototyping technology is based on using computer software and
systems to assist in the creation, modification, analysis, and optimization of 2-D or 3-D models of objects. Any computer program
that includes computer graphics and engineering functions for
manipulation can be classified as CAD software. CAM in dentistry
is the construction of a restorative device using the output from
the CAD software. CAM may be additive (buildup of a material)
or subtractive (removal of material from a larger starting piece).

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which dental applications can be used with CAD-CAM technology?

Indications for CAD-CAM
Many indications and materials are available for chairside CADCAM restorations, as shown in the list that follows. Each type of
material offers unique features for its indications. The CAD-CAM
system represents the process by which these materials are fabricated, and the clinical outcome of the restoration is determined by
the restorative material.
• Ceramic-, metal-, and resin-based crowns and bridges
• Copings and frameworks for metal-ceramic prostheses
• Full and partial dentures
• Inlays, onlays, partial crowns, and provisionals
• Implant abutments and crowns, including screw-retained crowns
• Orthodontic printed models and clear appliances
• Maryland bridges and veneers

Subtractive Manufacturing—CAM Milling
Machines
CAD-CAM crown fabrication was the first subtractive manufacturing introduced to dentistry in late 1980s. With CAD-CAM technology in a dental office, a patient may receive a crown with the

Digital Technology in Dentistry

327

same-day delivery and reduced chairside adjustments. Representative
CAD-CAM systems are offered by Dentsply Sirona (CEREC) and
Planmeca USA (Emerald). This group of equipment can be used to
fabricate ceramic and composite inlays, onlays, crowns, and veneers
from an optical impression of the prepared tooth made from a digital
impression. The restoration is designed using the system’s software
and milled from a solid block of ceramic or composite using diamond
and carbide burs. Restorations and prostheses may be prepared in a
single appointment, which eliminates the impression material, preparation of a model, preparation of a provisional restoration, and laboratory fabrication of the final restoration or prosthesis.

CAD-CAM Systems
Today’s dental CAD-CAM systems can be divided into four
groups. The first group is the chairside systems, such as CEREC
from Dentsply Sirona and Emerald from Planmeca USA. The
Primescan (Dentsply Sirona) uses blue light-emitting diode
(LED) light and smart pixel sensor video imaging for 24 frames
per second and processes more than 1 million 3-D data points per
second. The Emerald uses a multicolor laser-based system.
The second group is the commercial laboratory systems. For
these systems, the dentist should send physical impressions, master models, or raw scans to the laboratory of choice for the fabrication of the final prosthesis.
The chairside system usually operates on a closed-architecture
format, which requires the scan to be used only within the manufacturer’s proprietary CAD-CAM workflow, and this system uses
its own specific file format for CAD-CAM functions. The laboratory system uses an open-architecture format that allows a variety of file formats, such as STL, OBJ, and PLY. The STL is the
most popular file format in the field. The scan data can be easily
exported as an STL file format compared with other file formats.
The third group is stand-alone digital impression systems. This
type of system is based on an open-architecture format and takes
only intra- or extraoral scans. The raw file format is electronically transferred to a designated commercial laboratory for the
fabrication of the final prosthesis. The Medit i500 (Medit Corp)
works based on 3-D video technology. The TRIOS 3 (3Shape)
uses fast confocal microscopy optical scanning technology. The
iTero (Align Technology) uses laser light beams based on parallel confocal microscope technology. The True Definition Scanner
(Midmark) uses structured pulsating blue light with active wavefront sampling 3-D video technology. The CS 3600 (Carestream
Dental) uses LED light with active-speed 3-D video technology.
The fourth group is hybrid systems; these are a kind of mixand-match system based on an open-architecture format. A hybrid
system allows communication between products of many different
manufacturers, such as intra- and extraoral scanners, CAD units,
and CAM units. The dentist and laboratory can choose their preferred scanners, CAD-CAM software, computer hardware, 3-D
printers, and milling machines from a variety of vendors.
The common disadvantages of the laboratory, digital impression, and hybrid systems are the need for multiple clinical
appointments, the making of physical impressions, the fabrication
of provisionals, the increased total costs of fabrication, and the
delayed delivery time compared with the chairside systems.
CAD-CAM Materials
All classes of dental materials, including ceramics, polymers, and
metals, can be processed with CAD-CAM systems. In this chapter, ceramics are discussed, which is the most widely used material,
among others.

328

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

The CAD-CAM ceramics can be categorized into three main
groups, mainly by the glass content, and subgroups by the type of
material, as follows:
• Aesthetic ceramics with high glass content
Aluminosilicate (feldspathic or synthetic)—This material is a
mixture of high-melting glasses, nepheline, and albite,
such as the Mark II (VITA North America).
Lucite (40% to 50%) containing glass—The typical material of
this group is IPS e.max (Ivoclar Vivadent).
• Structural ceramics with low glass content
Lithia disilicate and zirconia reinforced lithia silicate—This
material group includes e.max CAD (Ivoclar Vivadent),
Suprinity (VITA North America), and Celtra Duo
(Dentsply Sirona).
Alumina, spinel, and alumina/zirconia—This material group
comprises In-Ceram Alumina, In-Ceram Spinel, and InCeram Zirconia (VITA North America).
• Structural ceramics without glass content
Polycrystalline alumina (with 3 wt% Mg for grain growth
control)—This material group includes VITA All-Cubes
(VITA North America).
Polycrystalline zirconia (with 3 to 5 wt% of Y for transformation toughening)—This material group includes VITA
YZ HT (VITA North America), CEREC Zirconia Blocks
(Dentsply Sirona), IPS e.max ZirCAD LT (Ivoclar Vivadent), and KATANA Zirconia Blocks (Kuraray America).

CAD-CAM Case
The advantage of the chairside CAD-CAM systems is that the
dentist can create any preparation design to preserve tooth structure as long as enough enamel structure remains for desirable
adhesion between the ceramic and the enamel. Because one-visit
CAD-CAM dentistry does not require provisional restorations
and temporary cement, contamination of the prepared tooth
structure is minimized, and the dentist can gain strong bonding
for optimal results.
The following clinical case demonstrates a CAD-CAM chairside partial-coverage (inlay or onlay) crown. The occlusal surface
of an existing resin composite restoration shows the existence of
a large marginal gap but without radiographic evidence of recurrent caries. After the old resin composite restoration was removed,
lesions of recurrent caries were revealed. The tooth was prepared
to receive a ceramic onlay. Once the cavity preparation was completed (Figure 15-1, A), the intraoral scans of the prepared tooth
were made (Figure 15-1, B). Scans of the unprepared teeth of the
opposing arch and the buccal bite registration were also taken (not
shown). The next step includes the occlusal relation adjustment
(Figure 15-1, C) and the design of the prosthesis (Figure 15-1,
D). The final preview of the milling process prior to the actual
manufacturing process is shown in Figure 15-1, E. The CADCAM restorations were then tried and inserted with dual-cure
resin cement. The final occlusal photo (Figure 15-1, F) shows a
well-integrated aesthetic ceramic restoration.

All materials presented here can be processed by either a chairside or a laboratory milling machine. The commercial labs use disks
for bulk production of multiple units, and chairside milling units
work with individual blocks. The manufacturers produce only feldspathic (aluminosilicate) blocks for chairside milling. Thus there
are no laboratory-milled feldspathic CAD-CAM prostheses.

Additive Manufacturing—3-D Printing
Additive manufacturing (AM) or 3-D printing includes processes in which material is incrementally joined or solidified under
computer control to create an object. The object is formed layer
by layer, such as fusing of particles or curing of light-sensitive

A

B

C

D

E

F

• Figure 15-1 Computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD-CAM) processing of an
onlay. A, Tooth preparation. B, Intraoral scan of the preparation. C, Occlusal relation adjustment step.
D, Virtual restoration editing step. E, Final milling preview. F, Postoperative photo.

CHAPTER 15

Digital Technology in Dentistry

329

polymers. A key advantage of 3-D printing is the ability to produce very complex geometries of restorations designed from intraoral impressions.
Desktop 3-D printers use dental resins for the fabrication
of temporary prosthetics, surgical guides, orthodontic models,
retainers, and aligners. Various dental resins for printing applications may be chosen for any of the desired characteristics, such
as transparency for optical clarity, translucency for esthetics, flexibility for patient comfort, or high-impact resins that resist wear
and fracture. The most common applications are transparent
aligners and night guards. Aligners serve as alternatives to braces
and have become especially popular because of their invisibility.
This technology may also be used for printing diagnostic casts
(Figure 15-2). Oral surgery guides from 3-D printing offer the
required precision to verify proper implant positioning where
bone is present (Figure 15-3, A), adequate bone reduction for

bone recontouring (Figure 15-3, B), and precise drill positions
(Figure 15-3, C), to name a few. These guides also facilitate immediate placement and loading of implants where a provisional restoration can be printed prior to the surgery (Figures 15-4 and
15-5). A printable material with contact bactericidal activity is
also possible, which may lead to crowns, retainers, aligners, and
implants that are resilient to degradation under oral conditions,
with longer clinical lifetimes.

• Figure 15-2 Three-dimensional (3-D) printed model of diagnostic casts.

• Figure 15-4 Surgical placement of anterior implant using a three-dimensional (3-D) surgical guide. (Courtesy Dr. Luiz Gonzaga.)

(Courtesy Dr. Luiz Gonzaga.)

Current Additive Manufacturing Technologies
Currently, 3D printing includes stereolithography (SLA), fused
deposition modeling (FDM), selective laser melting (SLM), and
direct metal laser sintering (DMLS). The most commonly used
3-D printing process (46% as of 2018) is FDM, a material extrusion technique. All 3-D printing requires a CAD file for execution
of the manufacturing.

• Figure 15-3 A, Computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD-CAM) image of a positioning guide for implant placement (top), final processed three-dimensional (3-D) printed guide (bottom).
B, CAD-CAM image of bone reduction guide (top), final 3-D printed guide (bottom). C, CAD-CAM image
of drill positioning guide (top), final -D printed guide (bottom). (Courtesy Dr. Luiz Gonzaga.)

330

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

• Figure 15-5 Because of the accuracy of this technology, a provisional
restoration can be printed to fit exactly where the implant was placed and
be loaded immediately. (Courtesy Dr. Luiz Gonzaga.)

Stereolithography

For this CAM method, thin layers of a photo-curable resin are
cured to create the computer-designed geometry. Liquid resin is
photopolymerized by using small-spot-size LEDs or laser radiation to locally cure the liquid resin. As the liquid resin cures on
the surface, the platform holding the object is gradually lowered
in the pool of liquid, allowing liquid resin to flow to the area to
be cured. The resin objects shown in Figures 15-2 to 15-5 were all
made by SLA.
SLA printers achieve the most accurate results because of the
precision of the layers this type of printer creates. The thickness
of the printed layers can be controlled by adaptive slicing. If the
surface has been designed with a high curvature, for example,
thinner layers will be applied than would be the case for a lowcurvature surface. Adaptive slicing yields a better surface quality than uniform slicing, which minimizes variations in the cusp
height across the layers.
Fused Deposition Modeling

This additive technique incrementally deposits molten thermoplastic material according to a CAD file. The item is 3-D printed
by layer, and the molten material becomes a solid object as it
cools. FDM printing uses an additive-layer approach similar to
that in SLA but uses plastic filaments rather than liquid resin. The
plastic filament is fed through an extruder that melts and deposits
the material layer by layer to form the item.
A filament of thermoplastic, metal wire, or other material is
fed into an extrusion nozzle head, which heats the material and
controls the extrusion. FDM is restricted in the variation of shapes
that may be fabricated. The method is also known also as fused
filament fabrication (FFF). FDM has been modified to use pellets
directly instead of filament. This process is called fused particle fabrication (FPF) or fused granular fabrication (FGF).

Materials for Additive Manufacturing
All classes of materials discussed in Chapter 2 are currently used
to fabricate objects by AM technology, but these materials need
to be in a flowable state or powder for processing. For polymeric
objects, photocuring liquid monomers have been used with SLA,
and thermoplastic pellets or wires are used with FDM. Postcuring
of objects made of SLA is often needed. For metal objects, metal
powder form made by atomization is the most popular feedstock
that is selectively melted by laser. Even though not all ceramics
include or form a liquid phase as with resins and metals, sintering
of ceramic particles by selective laser (SLS) is possible. However,
these ceramic parts have a rough and porous surface and are suitable as tissue-engineering scaffolds. To improve the densification
of ceramic objects, a photocuring liquid filled with a high amount
of ceramic fillers is cured with SLA, and the resulting green body is
heat-treated in a furnace to burn off resin residue and densify the
desired ceramic structure.
The mechanical properties of 3-D printed parts limit the
potential of large-scale printing. Therefore an optimized pattern of
3-D printing is important to control flaw sensitivity. Also, changes
in the printing environment have an influence on the quality of
the finished products. AM is capable of fabricating parts of various sizes, from the micro- to macro-scale. However, the precision
of the printed parts is dependent on the accuracy of the method
employed and the scale of printing. For instance, micro-scale 3-D
printing poses challenges with the resolution, surface finish, and
layer bonding, which sometimes require postprocessing techniques such as sintering.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does CBCT technology differ from quantitative light-induced
fluorescence (QLF) and other optical imaging systems?

Diagnostic Systems
Cone-Beam Computed Tomography
CBCT is an imaging technology in which the radiation is divergent
and forms a cone. This imaging technology is especially useful for
implant dentistry, oral surgery, endodontics, and orthodontics. During imaging, the CBCT x-ray generator and detector rotate around
the patient’s head. From the digital file, a 3-D rendering is computed
that can be used to visualize both erupted and nonerupted teeth,
tooth root anatomy, and abnormal structures. Such information is
beyond what is possible to see in conventional 2-D radiographs.
CBCT images deliver substantially greater radiation than standard dental 2-D x-ray exams. Thus the enhanced diagnostic sensitivity leads to greater patient radiation exposure. The exposure
can be mitigated by
• choosing the scanning protocol in accordance with the minimum diagnostic requirement, or
• using a thyroid collar and leaded glasses when these do not
detract from the image quality.

Selective Laser Melting

This AM technique uses a high-power laser to melt and fuse a
variety of metal and alloy powders together. The 2-D layers are
incrementally melted and assembled to form a 3-D object. SLM is
also known as DMLS or laser powder bed fusion (LPBF). The term
DMLS is misleading in that the object is melted during production, a variation of liquid-phase sintering.

Optically Based Caries Diagnosis
Caries causes demineralization of enamel and dentin. Demineralized areas have greater porosity than the surrounding tissue, which
changes the optical properties of the mineral tissue. This change in
optical properties is used to locate caries. Quantitative light-induced

CHAPTER 15

fluorescence (QLF) is such a nondestructive diagnostic method for
the assessment of early caries lesions. Teeth fluoresce because of
the presence of minerals in the enamel and dentin. When a tooth
becomes carious, the fluorescence of the carious lesion decreases.
The fluorescence image of enamel with incipient lesions can be digitized, and then the loss of fluorescence at the lesion site can be quantified in comparison to the fluorescence of sound enamel. The QLF
image provides a measure of the extent and severity of the lesion.
Changes in fluorescence and lesion area can be followed over time
to measure lesion development before intervention. QLF has been
successfully applied to smooth surfaces and occlusal surfaces but not
interproximal lesions.
The new QLF-D BiLuminator allows ordinary white-light
images to be collected simultaneously with fluorescent images.
The images aid in direct visual assessment and highlight features
such as leaking restoration margins with secondary caries, occlusal and interproximal caries, sealant integrity, cariogenic activity
under sealants, and the presence of calculus and gingivitis. Other
recently introduced fluorescent detection systems include the
CamX Spectra Caries Detection System (Air Techniques, Melville,
NY) and the SoproLIFE Dental Caries Detection System (Acton
North America, Mount Laurel, NJ).

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does virtual reality differ from augmented reality?

Virtual and Augmented Reality
Virtual reality (VR) is a computer-generated simulation that allows
for interactive experiences and fully re-creates the environment
through simulation.
Augmented reality (AR) is considered a form of VR in which
interacting with the real world takes place through simulation.
The objects and individuals are augmented because they are computer-generated images, but they are perceived in the real world
through a camera projected onto a screen.
VR and AR systems have become increasingly common in
dental education. Their use has changed clinical training and

Digital Technology in Dentistry

331

encourages self-directed learning. These digital tools are thought
to lower the cost of clinical education while increasing the quality.

The Future
As digital dentistry evolves, the incorporation of this technology
into dental training and clinical practices will also change. Future
dental professionals must be exposed to new digital procedures in
the curriculum and teaching.

Selected Readings
Ahrberg D, Lauer HC, Ahrberg M et al: Evaluation of fit and efficiency
of CAD/CAM fabricated all-ceramic restorations based on direct and
indirect digitalization: a double-blinded, randomized clinical trial,
Clin Oral Investig 20:291, 2016. doi:10.1007/s00784-015-1504-6.
Dutã M, Amariei CI, Bogdan CM, et al: An overview of virtual and augmented reality in dental education, Oral Health Dent Manag 10:42–
48, 2011.
Haag M, Igel C, Fischer MR: Digital teaching and digital medicine: A
national initiative is needed, GMS J Med Educ, 35 Doc43, 2018.
Jung EH, Lee ES, Jung HI, et al: Development of a fluorescence-image
scoring system for assessing noncavitated occlusal caries, Photodiagn
Photodyn 21:36–42, 2018.
Ngo TD, Kashani A, Imbalzano G: Additive manufacturing (3D printing): A review of materials, methods, applications and challenges,
Compos Part B-Eng 143:172–196, 2018.
Oberoi G, Nitsch S, Edelmayer M: 3D printing-encompassing the facets
of dentistry, Front Bioeng Biotechnol 6(172):1–13, 2018.
Park S, Kim S, Lee H, et al: Comparison of fluorescence parameters
between three generations of QLF devices for detecting enamel caries
in vitro and on smooth surfaces, Photodiagn Photodyn 25:142–147,
2019.
Tofail SAM, Koumoulos EP, Bandyopadhyay A, et al: Additive manufacturing: scientific and technological challenges, market uptake and
opportunities, Mater Today 21:22–37, 2018.
van der Veen M, de Josselin de Jong E: Application of quantitative
light-induced fluorescence for assessing early caries lesions: In Faller
RV, (editor): Assessment of Oral Health Monogr Oral Sci, Basel, 2000,
Karger, vol 17, pp 144–162 .
Yue J, Zhao P, Gerasimov JY, et al: 3D-Printable antimicrobial composite
resins, Adv Funct Mater 25:6756–6767, 2015.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Web page
Henry K, Dr Bicuspid “5 things we can expect from AI in the coming
decade.” https://www.drbicuspid.com/index.aspx?sec=sup&sub=
cad&pag=dis&itemId=325936. Accessed February 24, 2020.
Publications
Ahrberg D, Lauer HC, Ahrberg M: Evaluation of fit and efficiency of
CAD/CAM fabricated all-ceramic restorations based on direct and
indirect digitalization: A double-blinded, randomized clinical trial, Clin
Oral Investig 20:291–300, 2016. doi:10.1007/s00784-015-1504-6.
Child PL, Jr: Digital dentistry: Is this the future of dentistry? Dent Econ
101:108–114, 2011 http://www.dentaleconomics.com/articles/print/
volume-101/issue-10/features/digital-dentistry-is-this-the-future-ofdentistry.html.
Dutã M, Amariei CI, Bogdan CM, et al: An Overview of Virtual
and Augmented Reality in Dental Education, Oral Health Dent
Manag 10:42–49, 2011.
Fasbinder DJ, Dennison JB, Heys DR, et al: The clinical performance of
CAD/CAM-generated composite inlays, J Am Dent Assoc 136:1714–
1723, 2005. PMID:16383055 [Pub Med-indexed for MEDLINE].
Haag M, Igel C, Fischer MR: Digital teaching and digital medicine: A
national initiative is needed, GMS J Med Educ, 2018 35. doi:10.3205/
zma001189 Doc43.
Hickel R, Manhart J: Longevity of restorations in posterior teeth and
reasons for failure, J Adhes Dent 3:45–64, 2001. PMID: 11317384
[Pub Med-indexed for MEDLINE].
Jarad FD, Russell MD, Moss BW: The use of digital imaging for colour
matching and communication in restorative dentistry, Bri Dent J
199:43–49, 2005. doi:10.1038/sj.bdj.4812559.
Jung EH, Lee ES, Jung HI, et al: Development of a fluorescence-image
scoring system for assessing noncavitated occlusal caries, Photodiagn
Photodyn 21:36–42, 2018.
Li G: Patient radiation dose and protection from cone-beam computed tomography, Imaging Sci Dent 43:63–69, 2013. doi:10.5624/
isd.2013.43.2.63.
Mehl A, Kunzelmann KH, Folwaczny M, et al: Stabilization effects of
CAD/CAM ceramic restorations in extended MOD cavities, J Adhes
Dent 6:239–245, 2004. PMID:15536855 [Pub Med-indexed for
MEDLINE].

Ngo TD, Kashani A, Imbalzano G, et al: Additive manufacturing (3D
printing): A review of materials, methods, applications and challenges, Compos Part B-Eng 143:172–196, 2018.
Oberoi G, Nitsch S, Edelmayer M, et al: 3D printing-encompassing
the facets of dentistry, Front Bioeng Biotechnol 6(172):1–13, 2018.
doi:10.3389/fbioe.2018.00172.
Otto T, De Nisco S: Computer-aided direct ceramic restorations: A
10-year prospective clinical study of Cerec CAD/CAM inlays and
onlays, Int J Prosthodont 15:122–128, 2002. PMID: 11951800 [Pub
Med-indexed for MEDLINE].
Park S, Kim S, Lee H, et al: Comparison of fluorescence parameters
between three generations of QLF devices for detecting enamel caries
in vitro and on smooth surfaces, Photodiagn Photodyn 25:142–147,
2019. doi:10.1016/j.pdpdt.2018.11.019.
Reich SM, Wichmann M, Rinne H, et al: Clinical performance of large,
all-ceramic CAD/CAM-generated restorations after three years: a
pilot study, J Am Dent Assoc 135:605–612, 2004. PMID:15202752
[Pub Med-indexed for MEDLINE].
Sjogren G, Molin M, van Dijken JW: A 10-year prospective evaluation of CAD/CAM-manufactured (Cerec) ceramic inlays cemented
with a chemically cured or dual-cured resin composite, Int J Prosthodont 17:241–246, 2004. PMID: 15119879 [Pub Med-indexed for
MEDLINE].
Sturdevant JR, Bayne SC, Heymann HO: Margin gap size of ceramic
inlays using second-generation CAD/CAM equipment, J Esthet Dent
11:206–214, 1999. PMID: 10825877 [Pub Med-indexed for MEDLINE].
Syrek A, Reich G, Ranftl D, et al: Clinical evaluation of all-ceramic
crowns fabricated from intraoral digital impressions based on the
principle of active wavefront sampling, J Dent 38:553–559, 2010.
doi:10.1016/j.jdent.2010.03.015.
Tofail SAM, Koumoulos EP, Bandyopadhyay A, et al: Additive manufacturing: scientific and technological challenges, market uptake and
opportunities, Mater Today 21:22–37, 2018. doi:10.1016/j.mattod
.2017.07.001.
van der Veen M, de Josselin de Jong E: Application of quantitative
light-induced fluorescence for assessing early caries lesions: In Faller
RV, (editor): Assessment of Oral Health Monogr Oral Sci, Basel, 2000,
Karger, vol 17, pp 144–162 .
Yue J, Zhao P, Gerasimov JY, et al: 3D-Printable antimicrobial composite
resins, Adv Funct Mater 25:6756–6767, 2015.

331.e1

10
16
Chapter
Go Here for Cutting,
MaterialsTitle
andto
Processes
Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

CHAPTER OUTLINE

Outline Level One
Outline Level Two
O UOutline
T L I NLevel
E Two Outline Two
Outline Level 3
Benefits of Finishing and Polishing Restorative Materials
Outline Level 3
Mechanics of Abrasive Procedures

Outline Level One Level One
Outline Level Two Outline Two
Outline Level Two
Outline Level 3
Dentifrices
Outline Level 3
Summary and Recommendations

Abrasive Processes in Dentistry

Acknowledgment

K
E Y T EInstruments
RMS
Abrasive
key term this the is defininition of the key term that precedes this
Finishing and Polishing Procedures
the is defininition of the key term that precedes
key this the is defininition of the key term
key term this the is defininition of the key term that precedes this
K Ethe
Y isTdefininition
E R M S of the key term that precedes
Abrasive
A product that
haskey
a hard
phase
as an essential
constitukey
term defininition
of the
term
that precedes
this the
is
ent that provides
individual
particles with sharp cutting
defininition
of themany
key term
that precedes
edges.
Air-particle abrasion The process of material removal by way of
air-pressure–propelled abrasive particles. Typical applications
are surface cleaning, cavity preparation, and surface preparation
for bonding. The process is also known as erosion in the field of
tribology.
Bonded abrasive An abrasive instrument containing a phase that
holds abrasive particles in a more or less tight grip with spaces
in between that allow air or liquids to pass. The strength of
bonding in a product varies based on its intended use. Strong
bonding is required for work on hard materials. Breaking away
of grains from the bond of an abrasive is desirable as they
become dull. Bond materials include organic (resin or rubber),
vitrified (glass or glass-ceramic), and metal.
Buffing Polishing with a soft absorbent material such as cloth or
leather, typically in combination with a medium containing very
fine abrasive particles.
Bulk reduction and contouring An early process that precedes
finishing and polishing, whereby excess restorative material is
removed to develop the anatomical form of the final restoration.
Cutting Reduction of a material by use of an edged instrument,
such as a bladed dental bur, or a bonded abrasive disk or wheel;
implies material removal by a slicing action.
Dressing The use of a variety of tools to remove any debris that
may be clogging the spaces between abrasive particles on

term a short definition to follow
key term this the is defininition of the key term that precedes this
the is defininition of the key term that precedes
key this the is defininition of the key term
key term this the is defininition of the key term that precedes this
a bonded
abrasiveofinstrument
to expose
fresh abrasive and
the
is defininition
the key term
that precedes
restore grinding efficiency. Diamond-coated tools or bonded
abrasive stones of aluminum oxide or silicon carbide are the
most common devices used for dressing grinding wheels.
Erosion A process of material removal achieved by (1) air-pressure–propelled abrasives (air-particle abrasion), (2) pressurized liquid-abrasive mixtures (slurry erosion), or (3) chemical
dissolution using strong acids or alkali (chemical erosion or acid
etching).
Finishing The process of removing surface defects or scratches
created during the contouring process through the use of cutting or grinding instruments or both.
Grinding A machining process that uses coated or bonded abrasive wheels or points to turn against the surface of a material
workpiece in order to reduce the surface. Ground surfaces typically display linear scratch marks where abrasive particles have
ground material away.
Polish, polishing A process that uses very fine abrasives to
bring a material surface to a highly developed, finished, or
refined state. A minimal amount of material is removed from
the workpiece to generate a smooth, glossy appearance. The
force per unit area for polishing is the lightest of all processes
that use abrasives.
True/truing A process of correcting the concentricity and shape
of a grinding wheel; truing keeps the grinding wheel rotating
concentrically with the spindle axis of the motor or handpiece
head without vibration or wobble.

As has been stated many times throughout this book, the intraoral
surfaces of virtually every direct and indirect restoration must be contoured by various abrasive procedures. The goal of these procedures is
to efficiently produce the desired surface contours, contacts, textures,
and gloss on a restoration. These procedures involve removing varying

volumes of material from the surface by a process called wear. More
specifically, they employ abrasive materials and instruments to produce
abrasive wear. This form of abrasive wear is intentional as opposed to
the unintentional type of abrasive wear of composites (Chapter 5,
Wear) and ceramics (Chapter 10, Abrasiveness to Enamel).

332

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

Abrasive processes have been used since prehistoric times.
Over 10,000 years ago, hunting and gathering instruments such
as spear points, arrowheads, scraper tools, and hoes were formed
from hard, rock-like natural materials using primitive forms of
abrasion, chipping, grinding, and honing. Sandstone was used to
produce smoother surfaces on the Egyptian pyramids. Grinding
wheels of a primitive type were created over 4000 years ago by taking a cylindrical stone with an abrasive surface and spinning the
stone against metals and ceramics to adjust their shapes, reduce
rough areas, and produce smoother surfaces. These processes
were refined over subsequent millennia to produce metal daggers,
swords, spears, and shields of relatively high quality. The Chinese
introduced coated abrasives in the 13th century by embedding
seashell fragments in natural gums that were spread on a parchment backing. The invention transformed loose abrasive particles
into practical instruments.
In the early 1900s, abrasive technology advanced further
through the development and use of alumina grains, diamond
particles, and silicon carbide grit. New products in the form of
powders, slurries, particle-embedded discs and wheels, and burs
of different types emerged for use in dentistry. The further refinement of dental handpieces, air-abrasive technology, and methods
of bonding abrasives to various binders led to major processing
breakthroughs that have rapidly advanced the quality of treatment in the current era of restorative dentistry, particularly with
adhesive and esthetic dentistry. Figure 16-1 illustrates the series
of abrasive procedures and instruments used to bring a rough
removable dental prosthesis casting to the final polished state of
the prosthesis. The procedures depicted are sandblasting, cutting,
grinding, finishing, and polishing.
The focus of this chapter is to provide the reader with an awareness and broader background of the principles and mechanisms of

333

tools available to produce optimal surface finish and integrity in
dental restorations.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the benefits of finishing and polishing the surfaces of restorative
materials? What are the goals of finishing and polishing?

Benefits of Finishing and Polishing
Restorative Materials
Before any dental restoration or appliance is placed permanently
in the mouth, it should be polished to a smooth surface. Not
only is a rough surface on a restoration, prosthesis, orthodontic
appliance, and so forth uncomfortable for the patient, but it can
also cause food and other debris to cling to the surface. Such a
restoration or appliance becomes unsanitary and, in some cases,
tarnished or corroded.
Finished and polished restorations provide four benefits in
dental care: patient comfort, better gingival health, chewing
efficiency, and esthetics. One study showed that patients could
distinguish a difference in roughness from between 0.25 and
0.50 μm by tongue proprioception. The value is much lower than
20 μm as previously reported. Further, surface roughness greater
than 1 μm can lead to increased bacterial adhesion and unsightly
surface staining. Smooth surfaces resist the accumulation of food
debris and permit food to glide freely over occlusal and embrasure surfaces during mastication. Smoother restoration surfaces
help patients maintain oral hygiene by facilitating preventive oral
home care because dental floss and toothbrush bristles gain better
access to all surfaces and marginal areas. Tarnish and corrosion

• Figure 16-1 Abrasive types used to finish hard metal restorations with complex forms such as Co-Cr
alloy partial denture frameworks. A, The partial denture framework casting is sandblasted (air-particle
abraded) to remove residual casting investment. B, A silicon carbide disc is used on a dental lathe to cut
the casting sprues. C, Mounted corundum stones are used to grind excess metal left from cutting. D, A
series of rubber bonded abrasives containing progressively smaller silicon carbide grits is used to provide
a fine finish to the framework. E, Using felts with bar-type abrasives applied to bring the external finish of
the framework to a final high-luster polish. (Courtesy Bego USA.)

334

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

activity can be significantly reduced on some metallic restorations
if their entire surface area is polished (Chapter 3, Concentration
Cell Corrosion).
Rough restoration surfaces, especially those of ceramic-based
materials, can abrade and wear opposing dentition and restorations, resulting in the loss of functional and stabilizing contacts
between teeth or a reduction in the vertical dimension of occlusion. Rough contact areas on brittle materials can be stress concentration points, leading to chipping and fracture of the restoration.
Finishing and polishing of these surfaces will remove surface flaws
and improve the restoration’s resistance to fracture, especially in
areas that are under tension, such as the perimeter of layered allceramic crowns where unsupported areas of veneering ceramic are
present.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can the amount of lubricant either increase or decrease cutting
efficiency?

Mechanics of Abrasive Procedures
Mechanical abrasion, as described in this section, is a more controlled form of the abrasive wear discussed in Chapter 4, Wear. In
dentistry, the abrading instrument is referred to as the abrasive,
and the restorative material that has been abraded is called the substrate or workpiece. In this section, we will discuss two mechanisms
of abrasive wear used in dentistry: abrasion and erosion. We will
also discuss the proper motion of abrasive instruments.

Abrasion
Abrasive wear occurs where a rough, hard object, or a soft surface
containing hard particles, slides against a softer surface, digs into
the surface, and plows a series of grooves. The material removed
during the formation of the grooves, normally in the form of loose
particles, is called wear debris. A typical example is a diamond bur
abrading tooth structure during cavity preparation.

Abrasive wear can also arise in a somewhat different situation
when hard abrasive particles are introduced between two sliding surfaces and abrade material from one or both surfaces. The
mechanism of this form of abrasive wear seems to be that abrasive
particles adhere temporarily to, or become embedded within, one
of the sliding surfaces and plow grooves into the opposing surface.
An example is the use of nonbonded abrasives such as those in
dental prophylaxis pastes. These nonbonded abrasives are placed
in a rubber cup, which is rotated against a tooth or material surface.
The two forms of abrasive wear are (1) two-body wear (Figure
16-2, A), which involves a hard, rough surface; and (2) three-body
wear, involving loose, hard abrasive grains (Figure 16-2, B). These
two processes are not mutually exclusive. Diamond particles may
debond from a diamond bur and cause three-body wear. Likewise,
some abrasive particles in the abrasive paste can become trapped
in the surface of a rubber cup and cause two-body wear. Lubricants are often used to minimize the risk of these unintentional
shifts from two-body to three-body wear, and vice versa. Thus the
efficiency of cutting and grinding will be improved with the use
of lubricants such as water, glycerin, or silicone oil. Intraorally, a
water-soluble lubricant is preferred. Excessive amounts of lubricant may reduce the cutting efficiency by reducing the contact
between the substrate and the abrasive. Too little lubricant results
in increased heat generation and reduced cutting efficiency.

Erosion
Erosive wear is caused by hard particles impacting a substrate
surface, carried by either a stream of liquid or a stream of air,
as occurs in sandblasting a surface (Figure 16-2, C). Therefore
erosion as discussed here is technically a form of abrasive wear
that differs only in the mechanism by which the load necessary
for wear is delivered. Most dental laboratories have air-driven
grit-blasting units that employ hard-particle erosion to remove
surface material. A distinction must be made between this type
of erosion and chemical erosion. Chemical erosion removes
substrate material through the chemical-energy dissolution
effects of acids and alkalis versus the mechanical-energy effect

Substrate

Abrasive

A
Substrate
Abrasive
Substrate

B

C
• Figure 16-2 Illustrations of modes of wear involving abrasive particles. A, Two-body abrasion occurs
when abrasive particles are tightly bonded to the abrasive instrument that is removing material from the
substrate surface. B, Three-body abrasion occurs when abrasive particles are free to translate and rotate
between two surfaces. C, Hard-particle erosion (also called air-particle abrasion) is produced when abrasive particles are propelled against a substrate by air pressure.

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

of force-driven abrasive streams. Chemical erosion, more commonly called acid etching in dentistry, is not used as a method of
finishing dental materials. This type of erosion is used primarily
to prepare tooth surfaces and glass-phase ceramics to enhance
bonding or coating.

335

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the similarities and differences among the mechanisms responsible
for the cutting action of carbide burs and abrasive wheels?

Abrasive Motion

Abrasive Processes in Dentistry

The motion of abrasive instruments is classified as rotary, planar,
or reciprocal. In general, burs act in a rotary motion, flexible discs
act in a planar motion, and reciprocating handpieces convert a
cyclic motion into a reciprocal direction of motion of the abrasive
tool insert. Different abrasive grit sizes can be incorporated with
each motion. Reciprocating handpieces provide the special benefit
of accessing interproximal and subgingival areas to remove overhangs, finish subgingival margins without creating ditches, and
create embrasures.
In the case of a diamond bur abrading a tooth surface, as
illustrated in Figure 16-3, A, the diamond particles bonded to
the bur represent the abrasive, and the tooth is the substrate.
Also, note that the bur in the high-speed handpiece rotates in a
clockwise direction as observed from the head of the handpiece.
The rotational direction of a rotary abrasive instrument is an
important factor in controlling the instrument’s action on the
substrate’s surface. When a handpiece and bur are translated in
a direction opposite to the rotational direction of the bur at the
surface being abraded, a smoother grinding action is achieved
(Figure 16-3, B). However, when the handpiece and bur are
translated in the same direction as the rotational direction of
the bur at the surface, the bur tends to “run away” from the
substrate, thereby producing a less controlled grinding action
and a rougher surface. This effect is more noticeable at lower
rotational speeds.

Abrasion is a cutting action, but the topography of an abraded
surface is distinctly different from that of a cut surface. In a
high-speed tungsten carbide bur, the blades or cutting edges are
regularly arranged and allow removal of small pieces or segments
of the substrate as the bur rotates. As shown in Figure 16-4, A,
the pattern of removal of material by the tool corresponds to the
regular arrangements of the cutting blades. In contrast with cutting instruments, abrasive tools have many abrasive points that
generally are not arranged in an ordered pattern. For example, a
diamond rotary instrument may contain hundreds of sharp abrasive points that pass over the workpiece during each revolution
of the instrument (Figure 16-4, B). Each sharp point acts as an
individual blade and removes a chip or shaving from the material.
Because these many cutting edges are randomly arranged, innumerable scratches are produced on the surface (Figure 16-4, C).
Bulk reduction can be achieved through the use of instruments such as diamond burs, tungsten carbide burs, steel burs,
abrasive wheels, and separating discs. Whereas the action of diamond burs and abrasive wheels is often described as grinding, the
action of hard blades of steel and carbide burs is described as cutting. Figure 16-5 illustrates two sizes of carbide burs and diamond
burs of three grit sizes. Different types of instruments have unique
effects on surfaces. A 16-fluted carbide bur produces a smoother
finish than an 8-fluted carbide bur, but the latter removes material more rapidly. Similarly, the coarsest diamond bur removes

FO
FB

A

B
• Figure 16-3 The mechanics of high-speed rotary instrumentation. A, The blue circular arrow indicates
that the high-speed diamond bur rotates in a clockwise direction when viewed from the head of the handpiece. The green arrows indicate the direction that the instrument should be drawn. B, Incisal view of the
forces generated during high-speed rotary tooth preparation. As the bur rotates in a clockwise direction,
it generates a rotational force at the tooth surface, FB (large blue arrow that represents the reaction force
of tooth structure against the rotational force from the bur). The operator of the instrument must generate
an opposing force, FO (green arrow), which should exceed the reaction force to the bur, FB, and carry the
instrument against the tooth surface where the surface will be abraded.

336

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

A

B

C

• Figure 16-4 Bulk reduction of tooth surface. A, Tooth cut by a carbide bur. Note the pattern of removal
of tooth structure, which corresponds to the arrangement of blades on the bur. B, Magnified image of the
bonded diamond particles on a coarse diamond bur (×150). C, Tooth ground by a diamond bur. Note the
multiple scratches formed by the random arrangement of abrasive particles on the diamond bur.

A

B

C

D

• Figure 16-5 Instruments for surface reduction. A, 16-fluted (left) and 8-fluted (right) tungsten carbide
finishing burs. B, Fine diamond bur. C, Medium-grit diamond bur. D, Coarse-grit diamond bur.

material more quickly but leaves a rougher surface. The scanning
electron microscope (SEM) images shown in Figure 16-6 are the
surfaces of a resin-based composite produced by five instruments:
a coarse diamond, a 12-fluted carbide bur, a 16-fluted carbide bur,
an abrasive-coated finishing disc, and an abrasive-coated polishing
disc. The first three images represent surfaces of bulk reduction,
and the last two represent surfaces of fine finishing.
Rough nodules on a denture base can be removed with an abrasive, such as sandpaper, an emery arbor, or a grinding wheel. In each
case, the edges formed by the abrasive particles can remove the rough
spots as they move over the surface. Abrasives are available in varying
particle sizes. Coarse abrasives leave deep scratches in the surface,
which must be removed with finer abrasives. Finally, an abrasive can
be so fine that this results in a surface so smooth that the surface
reflects light, and the surface is said to be polished.

According to Figure 16-1, after sandblasting, an indirect prosthesis will go through a sequence of four abrasive procedures—
cutting, grinding, finishing, and polishing—depending on the
type of instruments used, the quantity of material removed from
the workpiece, and the purpose. Direct restorations normally do
not require cutting. We also use the term contour to refer to an
abrasive procedure. Dental contouring is a process of removing
small amounts of tooth enamel to change the shape, length, or
surface of the tooth to improve esthetic appearance or gingival
health. The term has evolved to comprise all procedures needed
to shape the restoration before finishing and polishing. All four
procedures perform abrasive wear, and there are only subtle differences among them. The purpose of the following discussion is not
to make a distinction among the four procedures but to present
these subtle differences.

CHAPTER 16

A

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

B

D

337

C

E

• Figure 16-6 Images of the surface of a resin-based composite after the grinding, finishing, and polishing processes using five instruments: A, A coarse diamond. B, A 12-flute carbide bur. C, A 16-flute carbide
bur. D, An abrasive-impregnated finishing disc. E, An abrasive-impregnated polishing disc.

Cutting
Cutting is generally understood as the removal of a part of a structure
by means of a shearing action, as in the removal of diseased tissue with
a bladed instrument or any other instrument in a bladelike fashion.
Substrates may be divided into separate segments, or they may sustain
deep notches and grooves by the cutting operation. Examples of cutting instruments are diamond burs, tungsten carbide burs, steel burs,
abrasive wheels, and separating discs. On the other hand, a separating
disc is an example of an instrument that can be used in a bladelike
fashion. A separating disc does not contain individual blades, but the
thin blade design allows the disc to be used in a rotating fashion to
grind through cast metal sprues and die-stone materials.

Grinding
A grinding operation is considered to be cutting but on a smaller
scale. Small particles of a substrate are removed through the action
of bladed or abrasive instruments. Grinding instruments typically
contain many randomly arranged abrasive particles. Each particle
may contain several sharp points that run along the substrate surface and remove particles of the substrate. Cutting and grinding
are both considered predominantly unidirectional in their action.
This means that a cut or ground surface exhibits cuts and scratches
oriented in one predominant direction.

Finishing
Surface imperfections can be an integral part of the substrate’s
internal structure or can be created by the instruments used for
cutting and grinding. Finishing involves removing marginal irregularities, defining anatomical contours, and smoothing away the
surface roughness of a restoration, with the aim of providing a

relatively smooth, blemish-free surface. A good example is the
removal of excess material at the junction of the tooth structure
and the restorative material to establish a smooth, uniform, and
well-adapted cavosurface margin.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does a clinician know when the smoothest surface has been achieved?

Polishing
Polishing is a special form of abrasive wear characterized by the use
of very small abrasive grains (5 μm or less) on an elastic backing.
The purpose of polishing is to provide an enamel-like luster to the
restoration. Each type of polishing abrasive acts on an extremely
thin region of the substrate surface. Polishing progresses from the
finest abrasive that can remove scratches from the previous abrasive procedure and is completed when the desired level of surface
smoothness is achieved. Polishing should be terminated when no
further change in surface luster or glossiness occurs during the
application of the finest abrasive that is used for that application.
At the end of this process, there should be no visible scratches.
However, there will always be scratches appearing at higher magnification. The instrument and the surface must be cleaned between
steps because abrasives left from the previous step will continue
making scratches. In clinical practice, the quality of the surface finish is usually judged by the surface luster without magnification.
Examples of polishing instruments are rubber abrasive points,
fine-particle discs and strips, and fine-particle polishing pastes.
Polishing pastes are applied with soft felt points, muslin (woven
cotton fabric) wheels, prophylaxis rubber cups, or buffing wheels.
Nonabrasive materials, such as felt, leather, rubber, and synthetic

338

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

foam, are popular applicator materials for retaining polishing
pastes during buffing procedures.
Polishing is considered multidirectional, which means that the
final surface scratches, albeit invisible, are oriented in many directions. Some examples of ground and polished surfaces are shown
in Figure 16-6. Note that the differences in surface appearance are
subtle because of the transitional nature of the grinding and polishing processes. If there were larger differences in the size of particles removed, the surface change would be more easily detected.
Heat generation during the abrasive procedures used for direct
restorations is a major concern. To avoid adverse effects to the
pulp, the clinician must cool the surface with a lubricant, such as
an air–water spray, and avoid continuous contact of high-speed
rotary instruments with the substrate. Intermittent contact during operation is necessary not only to cool the surface but also to
remove debris formed between the substrate and the instrument.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What precautions should be taken to minimize the generation of aerosols?
What precautions should be taken to minimize exposure to and inhalation of
aerosols?

Biological Hazards of Abrasive Procedures
Dispersions of solid particles are generated and released into the
breathing space of laboratories and dental clinics whenever abrasive procedures are performed. These airborne particles may contain tooth structure, dental materials, and microorganisms. Such
aerosols have been identified as potential sources of infectious and
chronic diseases of the eyes and lungs and present a hazard to dental
personnel and their patients. Silicosis, also called grinder’s disease,
is a major illness caused by the inhalation of silica-based aerosols.
The green-state zirconia-based computer-aided design/computeraided manufacturing (CAD-CAM) blocks for milling prostheses
are made from condensed zirconia (3Y-TZP, 4Y-TZP, etc.) particles
in the 40- to 90-nm particle-size range. The dust generated from
milling is currently classified as an eye, skin, and respiratory irritant.
The carcinogenic potential of this material has yet to be determined.
The milling generally is conducted in machines equipped with highefficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration and is considered safe for
the operator. However, technicians and dentists must de-sprue and
smooth these prostheses at the workbench prior to the sintering procedure. Therefore, following the protocol of controlling aerosolized
dust in the working place is of paramount importance.
Aerosol sources, in both the dental operatory and laboratory
environments, must be controlled whenever finishing procedures
are performed. Aerosols produced during finishing procedures may
be controlled in three ways: (1) containing at the source through
the use of adequate infection control procedures, water spray, and
high-volume suction; (2) using personal protective equipment
(PPE) such as safety glasses and disposable face masks that can
protect the eyes and respiratory tract from aerosols; and (3) installing an adequate ventilation system that efficiently removes any
residual particulates from the air. Many systems are also capable
of controlling chemical contaminants such as mercury vapor from
amalgam scrap and monomer vapor from acrylic resin.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is it sometimes inappropriate to select the hardest abrasive to reduce
the time required for finishing and polishing a prosthesis?

Abrasive Instruments
Abrasive particles should be irregular in shape so that they present
multiple sharp edges. Most abrasive grits are derived from crushing hard materials and passing particles through a series of mesh
screens (sieves) to obtain different particle-size ranges, namely,
coarse, medium-coarse, medium, fine, and superfine. Table 16-1
lists grit and particle sizes for commonly used dental abrasives.
An abrasive should be harder than the workpiece the abrasive
is supposed to abrade. If the abrasive cannot indent the surface to
be abraded, then the abrasive cannot possibly cut the surface. In
such a case, the abrasive dulls or wears. The first ranking of the
hardness of minerals was published in 1812 by Friedrich Mohs,
who ranked 10 minerals by their relative scratch. The least scratchresistant mineral, talc, received a score of 1, and the most scratchresistant mineral, diamond, received a score of 10. Despite the
lack of precision, a Mohs hardness scale kit can estimate how hard
the workpiece is to enable one to select an appropriate instrument to abrade the material with. Knoop and Vickers hardness
tests (Chapter 4, Hardness) quantify the hardness of materials.
The farther apart a substrate and an abrasive are in hardness values, the more efficient is the abrasion process. On the basis of a
comparison of hardness values for several dental materials listed in
Table 16-2, silicon carbide and diamond abrasives are expected to
abrade dental porcelain more readily compared with garnet, even
though the abrasive particles for all three materials have very sharp
edge characteristics.
The inherent strength of cutting blades or abrasive particles on
an abrasive instrument must be great enough to remove particles
of substrate material without becoming dull or fracturing too
rapidly. For example, when a grinding wheel is applied against a
metal, the abrasive particle strikes the workpiece suddenly as the
metal moves along the circumference of the wheel (Figure 16-3).
If the wheel shatters the instant the wheel contacts the work, the
blade is ineffective. On the other hand, if the wheel never fractures, the edge of the wheel may become dull, and the efficiency of
the abrasive is reduced. Ideally, the abrasive should fracture rather
than dull so that a sharp edge is always present. Fracture of the
abrasive is also helpful in shedding the debris accumulated from
the work. Although diamond burs cut almost any type of tooth
structure or restorative material, the diamond particles do not
fracture; rather, they lose substance at the tip. Furthermore, they
are likely to become clogged when ductile or soft substances are
abraded. They are most effective when used on the very hard and
brittle tooth enamel.
The main function of the abrasive is to remove material, yet
the final surface finish decides the effectiveness of the abrasives.
If too hard of an abrasive is used or if the grain size is too coarse
for use on a given material, deep scratches emerge in the substrate
that cannot be removed easily in subsequent finishing operations.
Additionally, if an abrasive does not have the proper particle shape
or does not break down in a manner that creates or exposes new
sharp-edged particles, the abrasive will tend to gouge the substrate.
A note of caution is warranted here. Subsurface grinding damage, characterized by undetectable flaws or cracks that result from
heavy-handed grinding and heat generation, can lead to early,
unexplained catastrophic failures in the newer all-ceramic restorative materials such as zirconia, lithia silicate, and lithia disilicate.
As discussed, in order for abrasive particles to remove material
from the surface of the dental restoration, they must be harder
than the restorative material. Further, the abrasives have to be held
against that material with sufficient force to allow the abrasive to

CHAPTER 16

TABLE 16-1

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

339

Abrasive Particle Sizes*
Aluminum Oxide, Silicon
Carbide, and Garnet (μm)

Grade†

Coated Disc
Diamond (μm)

120

142

Coarse

142

Supercoarse–coarse

150

122

122

Coarse–regular

180

70–86

86

Coarse–regular

240

54–63

60

Fine

320

29–32

52

Fine

400

20–23

40

Fine–superfine–coarse finishing

600

12–17

14

Superfine–medium finishing

800

9–12

8

Ultrafine–fine finishing

1200

2–5

6

Milling pastes

1500

1–2

4

Polishing pastes (2–5 μm)

2000

1

2

Polishing pastes (2–5 μm)

Grit/Mesh (USA)

Medium

Fine

Superfine

Abrasive Descriptions for Diamond
Burs and Diamond Polishing Paste

*Average particle sizes. Grades vary among manufacturers.
†

Four grades used for a popular brand of aluminum oxide–coated discs. Silicon carbide (SiC) and garnet may vary among manufacturers.

TABLE 16-2

Hardness Values of Abrasives, Tooth Structure, and Dental Materials
Mohs Hardness

Knoop Hardness (kg/mm2)

Vickers Hardness (kg/mm2)

Talc

1

–

–

Gypsum

2

–

12

Tripoli

6

–

–

Pumice

6–7

460–560

–

Porcelain

6–7

560

430

Tin oxide

6–7

–

–

Sand

7

–

–

Cuttle

7

800

–

Quartz

7

820

–

Zirconium oxide (Y-TZP)

7

–

1200–1300

Zirconium silicate

7.5

–

–

Garnet

8–9

1350

–

Emery

7–9

2000

–

Corundum

9

2000

–

Aluminum oxide

9

2100

1200

Tungsten carbide

9.8

1900

–

Silicon carbide

9–10

2500

–

Diamond

10

7000–10,000

–

Cementum

–

40

–

Dentin

3–4

70

62–70

Enamel (apatite)

5

340–431

294–408

Material
Abrasives

Tooth

Continued

340

PA RT I V

TABLE 16-2

Fabrication of Prostheses

Hardness Values of Abrasives, Tooth Structure, and Dental Materials—Cont’d
Mohs Hardness

Knoop Hardness (kg/mm2)

Vickers Hardness (kg/mm2)

Denture base resin

2–3

20

–

Calcite

3

135

–

14–24

40

Material
Restorative Materials

Metal-reinforced glass ionomer
Type III gold alloy

3

–

122–180 (soft)/155–250
(hard)

Type IV gold alloy

4

220

150–194 (soft)/248–280
(hard)

Amalgam

4–5

90

120 (Ag2Hg3 phase)

Rouge

5–6

–

–

Glass (glass–ceramics)

5–6

360

420

Composite (compomer)

–

–

52

Composite (nanohybrid)

–

–

60–62

Composite (nanofilled)

5–7

50–60

73–76

Composite (minifilled)

5–7

50–60

80

Composite (laboratory cured)

–

–

86–124

Titanium

–

–

210

Ti-6Al-4V

–

–

320

Nickel–chromium alloy (as cast)

–

153–328

200–395

Cobalt–chromium alloy (as cast)

–

–

280–380

Layered gold metal-ceramic alloy

–

–

35

Lithia-disilicate (milled)

–

–

550 (milled), 591 (sintered)

Lithia-disilicate (pressed)

–

–

601

Zirconia-reinforced lithia silicate

–

–

∼700

Zirconia oxide (Y-TZP)

–

–

1200–1300

penetrate and abrade material from the surface being worked. For
any given restorative material, choosing a sufficiently hard abrasive
that is strongly bound to the instrument supporting or carrying the
abrasive is important so that the abrasive can do the work efficiently.
In this section, we will discuss the types of abrasives used in dentistry
and how these abrasives are transformed into practical instruments.

Types of Abrasives
Many types of natural and synthetic abrasives are available
(Table 16-2), but only those commonly used in dentistry are discussed in this section. Generally, synthetic abrasives are preferred
because of their more predictable physical properties.
Aluminum Oxide. Synthetic aluminum oxide (alumina) is somewhat harder than corundum (natural alumina) because of
alumina’s purity. Several grain sizes of alumina are available
and widely used to make bonded abrasives, coated abrasives,

and air-propelled grit abrasives. Sintered aluminum oxide is
used to make white stones. Pink and ruby variations of aluminum oxide are sold in a vitreous-bonded form as noncontaminating mounted stones for the preparation of metal-ceramic
alloy surfaces to receive porcelain.
Arkansas Stone. This material contains microcrystalline quartz and
is dense, hard, and uniformly textured. Small pieces of this
mineral are attached to metal shanks and trued to various
shapes for fine grinding of tooth enamel and metal alloys.
Chalk. A white abrasive composed of calcium carbonate. Chalk is
used as a mild abrasive paste to polish tooth enamel, amalgam, and plastic materials.
Cuttle. A white calcareous powder made from the pulverized
internal shell of a Mediterranean marine mollusk. Cuttle is
available as a coated abrasive and is useful for delicate abrasion operations, such as polishing metal margins and dental
amalgam restorations.

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

Corundum. This is a white mineral form of aluminum oxide.
Corundum is most commonly used in an instrument known
as a white stone. Corundum has largely been replaced by synthetic alpha aluminum oxide in dental applications.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the advantages and disadvantages of natural diamond abrasives
compared with synthetic diamond abrasives?

Diamond. Diamond is a transparent, colorless mineral composed
of carbon atoms in a specific crystalline structure. This is the
hardest known substance. Diamond abrasives are supplied in
several forms, including bonded abrasive rotary instruments,
flexible metal-backed abrasive strips, and diamond polishing
pastes.
The advantages of synthetic diamonds over natural diamonds include their consistent size and shape and their
lower cost. Synthetic diamond is used in the manufacture
of diamond saws, wheels, and burs. Blocks with embedded
diamond particles are used to true other types of bonded
abrasives. Diamond polishing pastes are also produced from
particles smaller than 5 μm in diameter. Synthetic diamond
abrasives are used primarily on tooth structure, ceramic materials, and resin-based composite materials.
Emery. This abrasive is a grayish-black corundum prepared in a
fine-grain form. Emery is used predominantly in coated abrasive discs and is available in a variety of grit sizes. Emery may
also be used for finishing metal alloys or acrylic resin materials.
Garnet. The garnet minerals are the silicates of aluminum, cobalt,
iron, magnesium, and manganese. Garnet is extremely hard
and, when fractured during the grinding operation, garnet
forms sharp, chisel-shaped plates, making this material a
highly effective abrasive. Garnet is available on coated discs
and arbor bands and is used in grinding metal alloys and
acrylic resin materials.
Kieselguhr. This material is composed of the siliceous remains of
minute aquatic plants known as diatoms. The coarser form of
kieselguhr is called diatomaceous earth and is used as a filler in
many dental materials, such as the hydrocolloid impression
materials. Kieselguhr is a mild abrasive.
Pumice. Volcanic activity produces this light-gray highly siliceous
material. Pumice is used mainly in grit form but can be found
in some rubber-bonded abrasives. Both pumice forms are
used on denture bases and in polishing tooth enamel, dental
amalgam, and acrylic resins.
Quartz. This is the most commonly used form of silica and is a
very hard, colorless, and transparent mineral. It is pulverized
to form sharp, angular particles to make coated abrasive discs
that are used primarily for finishing metal alloys and grinding
dental enamel.
Rouge. Iron oxide is the fine red abrasive component of rouge. Like
tripoli, rouge is blended with various soft binders into a cake
form. Rouge is used to polish high-noble-metal alloys such as
yellow gold alloys.
Sand. Sand is a mixture of small mineral particles predominantly
composed of silica. The mixtures are applied under air pressure, through a process called sandblasting, to remove refractory investment materials from base-metal alloy castings.
They are also coated onto paper discs for grinding metal
alloys and acrylic resin materials.

341

Silicon Carbide. The particles are sharp, and they break to form
new sharp particles exhibiting highly efficient cutting of
materials, such as alloys, ceramics, and acrylic resin materials. Silicon carbide is available as an abrasive in coated discs
and as vitreous- and rubber-bonded instruments in green and
blue-black form. The green form is often preferred because
substrates are more visible against the green color.
Tin Oxide. This extremely fine abrasive material is used extensively
as a polishing agent for polishing teeth and metallic restorations in the mouth. It is mixed with water, alcohol, or glycerin to form a mildly abrasive paste.
Tripoli. This abrasive is derived from a lightweight, friable siliceous sedimentary rock. The rock is ground into very fine
particles and formed with soft binders into bars of polishing
compound for polishing metal alloys and some acrylic resin
materials.
Zirconium Oxide. This abrasive is tougher than aluminum oxide
and usually used as a mixture with aluminum oxide primarily
in elastic or rubberlike finishing and polishing rotary-shaped
instruments.
Zirconium Silicate. Zircon or zirconium silicate (ZrSiO4) is a mineral that is ground to various particle sizes and used to make
coated abrasive discs and strips. ZrSiO4 is frequently used as
a component of dental prophylaxis pastes.

Design of Abrasive Instruments
To achieve the goal of holding abrasives against a workpiece with
pressure, abrasives are often mixed with another material to fabricate an instrument for practical applications. Abrasive instruments
are generally classified as bonded, coated, and nonbonded. Bonded
instruments use a binder to hold abrasive particles together and
are molded to form tools of desired sizes and shapes (Figure 16-7).
Coated instruments are fabricated by securing abrasive particles to
a flexible backing material with an adhesive. These instruments are
usually supplied as discs and finishing strips (Figure 16-8). Nonbonded abrasives are loose abrasive particles mixed with water,
glycerin, or some other medium to produce a paste or slurry or are
propelled by the force of air or water pressure against a workpiece
(such as sandblasting for buildings). Each class of instrument is
discussed in the following subsections.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can one differentiate between high-quality and low-quality bonded
abrasive tools?

Bonded Abrasives
Bonded abrasives are made by incorporating abrasive particles
with a binder to form grinding tools such as points, wheels, separating discs, coated thin discs, and a wide variety of other abrasive
instruments. The binder can be organic substances (resinoid, rubber, and so forth), ceramics (glass or glass-ceramic), and metals.
Bonding of abrasive particles to the binders can be achieved by
sintering, vitrification, and polymerization of binders. Additional
methods are also used.
Bonded abrasives that tend to disintegrate rapidly against
a substrate are too weak and result in increased abrasive costs
because of the reduced instrument life. Those that tend to degrade
too slowly get clogged with grinding debris. The result is a loss of

342

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

• Figure 16-7 Typical bonded abrasive instruments used in the dental
laboratory include vitreous bonded abrasive wheels and points (three instruments on left) and rubber-bonded abrasive bullets (three instruments
on right).

• Figure 16-9 Spiral wheel polishers are designed for maximal flexibility
of use on most areas of a restoration. These polishers have a polyamide
rubber construction and are available in different diameters with several
types and grits of embedded abrasive. Laboratory and clinic polishers are
available for use on denture acrylics, composites, ceramics, and precious
metals. (Courtesy Dr. Farzan Pouranfar.)

• Figure 16-8 Coated abrasive discs and strips. Discs are available in
several sizes and with both paper and moisture-resistant backings. Paperbacked discs are represented by the top row of discs; moisture-resistant
Mylar-backed discs are shown in the second row. Mylar-backed abrasive
strips may be coated with two different grades of abrasive. The coatings
are separated in the center of the strip by an uncoated area, which allows
the strip to be passed between teeth.

abrasive efficiency, increased heat generation, and increased finishing time. An ideal binder holds the abrasive particles in the
tool long enough to cut, grind, or polish the substrate, and yet
the binder releases the particles either before cutting efficiency
is lost or before heat buildup causes thermal damage to the substrate. Binders are specially formulated for substrate-specific
applications.
Sintering is a process of closely packing particles below the
melting point of the main components to densify and strengthen
a structure by bonding, diffusion, and flow between particles. For
example, the head of a bladed tungsten carbide bur is made from a
mixture of 5% to 7% of cobalt powder with a balance of tungsten
carbide powders and less than 1% of other additives placed under
pressure in vacuum and heated to approximately 1350 °C. The
sintered head is then welded to a steel shank.
Vitreous-bond materials are composed of finely ground glassforming materials or ceramic matrix material with which the abrasive is thoroughly mixed. The mixture of binders and abrasive is
cold-pressed to the instrument shape and fired to fuse the binder.
The vitrified instruments are strong and rigid. They retain high
strength at elevated temperatures and are practically unaffected by
water, oils, and acids.

Resinoid-bonded abrasive is a mixture of phenolic resin in powdered or liquid form mixed with the abrasive grains cold-pressed
or hot-pressed to a form, then heated to cure. Hot-pressing yields
an abrasive binder with extremely low porosity. The reactions
are thermosetting processes. Rubber-bonded abrasives are made
in a similar manner. Because most of the rubber wheels, cups,
and points contain latex, a known allergen, all residues must be
removed from polished surfaces. Spiral finishing and abrasive
wheels (Figure 16-9) are made of synthetic thermoplastic polymers impregnated with aluminum oxide particles.
Metal bonds are used to better retain diamond abrasives to the
instrument because diamond is the hardest material known, and
diamond grits are expensive and must be used in limited quantities. Metal bonds provide high grit retention and low wear during grinding. Metal bonds are either multilayered by sintering a
mixture of metal powder and abrasive particles or single layered by
electroplating or brazing. The multilayered method is similar to the
sintering process discussed earlier. For the single-layered method,
diamond abrasives are bonded to metal wheels and bur blanks with
special heat-resistant resins such as polyimides. The supercoarse to
fine grades are then electroplated with a refractory metal film such
as nickel. Figure 16-10 shows a set of specialized diamond burs for
occlusal reduction of tooth surfaces. The nickel plating provides
improved particle retention and acts as a heat sink during grinding.
Titanium nitride coatings, seen as a gold color on some diamond
abrasive instruments, further extends their longevity.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the purposes of truing a grinding instrument?

A bonded abrasive instrument should always be trued and
dressed before use. Truing is a procedure by which the abrasive
instrument is run against a harder abrasive block until the abrasive
instrument rotates in the handpiece without eccentricity or runout when placed on the substrate (Figure 16-11, A). The dressing

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

procedure, like truing, is used to shape the instrument, but dressing accomplishes two different purposes as well. First, the dressing procedure reduces the instrument to the correct working size
and shape. Second, dressing is used to remove clogged debris from
the abrasive instrument to restore grinding efficiency during the
finishing operation. The clogging of the abrasive instrument with
debris is called abrasive blinding. Abrasive blinding occurs when
the debris generated from grinding or polishing occludes the small
spaces between the abrasive particles on the tool and reduces the
depth to which particles can penetrate into the substrate. As a
result, abrasive efficiency is lost, and greater heat is generated. A
blinded abrasive appears to have a coating of the substrate material

343

on its surface. Frequent dressing of the abrasive instrument during the finishing operation on a truing instrument, as illustrated
in Figure 16-11 (B–E), maintains the efficiency of the abrasive in
removing the substrate material.
Diamond instruments are preshaped and trued; they are not
treated like other bonded abrasives. Diamond cleaning stones are
used on the supercoarse to fine grades to remove debris buildup
and to maintain grinding efficiency. An example of a diamond
cleaning stone is shown in Figure 16-12. Cleaning stones should
not be used on finishing diamonds because their bonded particles
are quickly removed. Manufacturers provide special operating and
cleaning instructions for these instruments.

Coated Abrasive Discs and Strips
Coated abrasives are fabricated by securing abrasive particles to
a flexible backing material (heavyweight paper, metal, or Mylar)
with a suitable adhesive material. These abrasives typically are
supplied as discs and finishing strips. Discs are available in various diameters and with thin and very thin backing thicknesses.
Both metal- and plastic-backed finishing strips are available to
smooth and polish the proximal surfaces of all direct and indirect bonded restorations. Metal-backed strips are usually limited
to situations in which very tight proximal contacts are involved.
Care must be taken to avoid lacerating the gingival tissues. Metalbacked strips are more costly, but they can be autoclaved and
used several times if they are not damaged and infection control
practice guidelines permit. Plastic-backed strips are used primarily for resin composites, compomers, hybrid ionomers, and resin
cements. A further designation is made in regard to whether or
not the disc or strip is moisture resistant. The use of abrasive discs
or strips with moisture-resistant backings is advantageous because
their stiffness is not reduced by water degradation. Furthermore,
moisture acts as a lubricant to improve cutting efficiency. Examples of coated abrasives are shown in Figure 16-8.
• Figure 16-10 Specialized diamond burs for occlusal reduction of tooth
surfaces. Color-coded bands refer to the depth of occlusal reduction that
will be created when grinding to the depth of the wide stop above the
diamond-coated portion of the bur. (Courtesy Meisinger USA.)

Nonbonded Abrasives
Nonbonded abrasives are primarily used for final finishing and
polishing of enamel or restoration surfaces. For example, dental
prophylaxis pastes typically contain zirconium silicate. They must

• Figure 16-11 A dressing tool is used to true, shape, and clean bonded abrasive instruments both before
and during the finishing procedure. A, A rubber-bonded abrasive cylinder (left) shows irregular external
contours, which will cause it to run eccentrically. The cylinder is first trued against a diamond-coated
abrasive dressing tool (center) to make it rotate around the central axis of the instrument. Once trued, the
abrasive is further dressed to a desired working shape (right). B, Instruments that are blinded with debris
lose their cutting efficiency and generate more heat during operation. Note the coating of debris on the
abrasive surface. C, A scanning electron micrograph of the same instrument reveals the significant amount
of debris that is clogging the instrument surface. D, Frequent dressing of the abrasive on the dressing tool
shown in (A) removes accumulated debris. E, A scanning electron micrograph of the blinded abrasive
shown in (C) after dressing reveals that the debris has been removed and the abrasive surface restored.

344

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

A

B

C

• Figure 16-12 Removing debris from diamond instruments with a diamond cleaning stone. A, Diamond
bur in high-speed rotary handpiece before cleaning. Note the accumulated debris. B, The bur is cleaned
by running it against the moistened diamond cleaning stone for 2 to 4 seconds. C, The cleaned diamond
bur has no debris remaining among the diamond abrasive particles.

be applied to the substrate with a nonabrasive carrier such as synthetic foam, rubber, felt, or chamois cloth. The abrasive particles
are dispersed in a water-soluble medium such as glycerin.
Abrasive pastes used on restorative materials contain either
aluminum oxide (alumina) or diamond particles. Alumina pastes
should be used with a rotary instrument and increasing amounts
of water as the polishing process proceeds from coarser to finer
abrasive particles. Diamond abrasive pastes are used in a relatively dry condition. The instruments that apply the paste to the
material surface are equally important. These include ribbed prophy cups (the ribbed type or the more flexible nonribbed type),
brushes, and felt wheels.
Abrasive pastes have several disadvantages: (1) they are relatively thick and cannot gain access to embrasures, (2) the pastes
tend to splatter when they spin off the instruments at excessive
rotational speeds or if they become wet, and (3) heat is generated
when insufficient coolant is used or when continuous polishing
pressure is applied without allowing the coolant to reach the surface. More recently, diamond-impregnated spiral polishing instruments such as the Sof-Lex Diamond Polishing System (3M ESPE,
St. Paul, MN) have been introduced and offer an alternative to
paste abrasives.
Nonbonded abrasives are used for air-particle abrasion of restoration surfaces. In dry form, aluminum oxide powders, in 50- to
100-μm sizes, are used to prepare internal crown and veneer surfaces for cementation and bonding procedures. Desiccated silica
glass beads are similarly used to remove investment materials from
pressed ceramic castings.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Which procedure will ensure that progressively finer abrasives completely
remove scratches made by previous coarse abrasives?

Finishing and Polishing Procedures
Dental abrasives have many uses in both clinical and laboratory
settings. They are used for dental prophylaxis procedures and for
the adjustment and preparation of natural tooth structures. They
are used extensively for bulk reduction and contouring, finishing, and polishing of the wide array of available dental materials. Therefore abrasives are available in a variety of hardnesses and

come in the form of powders; pastes; nickel-plated diamond burs;
and bonded abrasive stones, discs, wheels, points, and cups. The
best choice for any dental application depends on the substrate
material type, the substrate’s initial surface quality, and the operator’s specific needs. Specific needs vary from cutting or rough
grinding to final polishing to achieve a desired luster or gloss.
Almost all direct restorative materials have an initial softer
state that can be preshaped to achieve a near-final form prior to
hardening; so, again, finer abrasives are generally required to finish and polish direct restorations. An ideal abrasive instrument
will perform removal of surface material, and the abrasive binder
will release worn abrasive particles to expose newer, sharper ones
as the finishing operation proceeds before potentially damaging
heat is generated as a result of lack of abrasion from particle loss or
the instrument clogging with debris. Hard materials such as metal
alloys and ceramics require harder abrasives with strong binders,
whereas softer resin-based composites do not. Although flexible
abrasive discs designed for contouring and polishing resin-based
composites can be used on metal alloys, they are only useful for
final polishing because even though their abrasive particles are sufficiently strong, their adhesive binders are weak.
The physical form and stiffness of a polishing instrument also
affects the manner of material removal and the surface finish. For
example, Sof-Lex and Sof-Lex XT Extra Thin (3M ESPE, St. Paul,
MN) contouring and polishing discs for resin-based materials are
available in the same four abrasive grades: course, medium, fine,
and superfine. Sof-Lex discs have soft, flexible backings, whereas
the XT discs have thinner, stiffer backings. Although light or heavy
pressure can be applied with either style disc, the softer backing of
the Sof-Lex disc allows the disc to flex and adapt more readily to
rounded surfaces, especially at lower rotational speeds. The thinner, stiffer XT discs are designed to access tighter spaces without
buckling for the development of anatomy like narrow embrasure
contours. When placed against rounded contours, XT discs tend
to create flat spots because of their stiffness. Both forms yield
specific advantages in specific areas of application. These discs
are color coded, with darker colors representing coarser grades of
abrasives. However, abrasive discs and strips available from other
manufacturers may not follow the same coding scheme.
Comprehensive restorative material finishing sets are becoming increasingly popular in that they provide for finishing and
polishing of all areas of the restoration. Many come in singleuse set packaging for better infection control. For example, the

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

345

• Figure 16-13 The Astropol polishing kit comprises four shapes made with three grit sizes—prepolish
(blue), polish (green), and high-gloss polish (pink)—and polishers suitable for both resin composite materials and amalgam. (Courtesy Ivoclar Vivadent.)

Astropol finishing and polishing set (Figure 16-13; Ivoclar Vivadent, Amherst, NY) for composites and ceromers comes in four
different instrument shapes and three levels of abrasiveness. The
four shapes provide for interdental and occlusal applications, and
the three abrasive grades, Astropol F, Astropol P, and Astropol HP,
allow for prepolishing, polishing, and high-gloss polishing, respectively. Polishing systems are available from dental abrasive instrument manufacturers for each category of dental materials.
The manufacturers also provide information about the abrasive instruments, such as the type of abrasive and binder used,
intended applications, recommended speed of the instrument,
storage, sterilization, coolant requirement, and block for dressing. The laboratory technician and clinician should familiarize
themselves with the instructions for use (IFUs) provided for the
instrument selected and recommendations to avoid cross-contamination of instruments used between certain materials.

Resin-Based Composite Restorations
Dental composites are among the most difficult types of materials to predictably finish and polish to a high luster because they
contain a relatively soft resin matrix and hard fillers of various
sizes in their structures. Figure 16-14 shows the surface roughness values, in root mean squares (Rrms), of some resin-based
composites when finished with Al2O3 discs and then subjected
to 20,000 toothbrushing cycles with dentifrices. The differences
in values mean that there must be selective grinding associated
with the soft resin matrix and the harder particle fillers. In addition, the final finish of a composite restoration depends on the
composition, cavity design, curing effectiveness, and postcuring time needed to achieve the restoration’s final properties. For
some composite materials, delayed finishing is recommended to
allow more polymerization to occur. Manufacturers’ recommendations often include the thickness of increments and the curing time needed with a light-curing unit of known irradiance in
mW/cm2.

Filtek Supreme Plus-Translucent
(3M ESPE)

Polished

Tetric EvoFlow
(Ivoclar Vivadent)

Brushed

Miris 2
(Coltene/Whaledent)
Filtek LS
(3M ESPE)
Herculite XRV
(Kerr Dental)
Ketac Nano
(3M ESPE)
Filtek Supreme Plus-A2 Enamel
(3M ESPE)
TPH
(Dentsply Caulk)

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Surface Roughness, Rrms (µm)

• Figure 16-14 Surface roughness (Rrms) of various resin-based composites after polishing with Al2O3 discs and then subjecting to 20,000 toothbrushing cycles with paste dentifrice at 200 g of weight. (Adapted from
Phark J-H et al: Influence of tooth brushing on surface roughness of restorative materials. AADR Abstract #1052, 2010.)

The finishing and polishing technique consists of three essential steps: First, contour the restoration either with 12-fluted carbide burs, 30- to 100-μm diamond burs, or coarse abrasive-coated
discs, depending on the dentist’s preference. Next, finish with 16to 30-fluted carbide burs, fine and extra-fine diamond burs, white
stones, white Arkansas stones, or medium and fine abrasive-coated
discs. Finally, polish with fine and extra-fine polishing paste (alumina or diamond); extra-fine abrasive-coated discs; silicon carbide–impregnated brushes; or diamond-impregnated rubber
polishing discs, cups, or points. Most finishing and polishing systems, whether impregnated or coated with abrasive, are available

346

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

in a variety of color-coded kits (Figure 16-13). The manufacturers’
instructions for their use must be followed to obtain the optimal
outcome.
During each stage of finishing and polishing, the operator
should proceed in one direction only. Then, after the use of the
next abrasive in the sequence, polishing should continue in a
direction perpendicular to the previous one. This process ensures
that scratches become more visible and that the effectiveness of
scratch removal can be assessed more rapidly. The recommended
abrasives and polishing instruments should be used in the proper
sequence, and intermediate abrasive steps should never be
skipped. For example, following a coarse abrasive disc with a fine
abrasive rather than a medium-grit abrasive would leave some of
the scratches produced by the coarse abrasive. The operator can
choose to use one system from start to finish (e.g., abrasive-coated
or flexible abrasive-impregnated rubber discs) or combine different systems based on preference and the location of the restoration
(e.g., sandpaper for anterior or a brush for posterior sites).

Dental Amalgam
Burnishing prior to carving allows for the removal of the excess
mercury and improves marginal adaptation and burnishing after
carving improves smoothness. However, burnishing alone will not
provide a completely scratch- and retention-free surface for amalgam restorations (Figure 8-12, A). Slow-speed handpieces should
be used for finishing and polishing amalgam restorations. In the
past, a recommendation was made to wait 24 hours before polishing amalgam restorations to allow amalgam to set completely.
However, if the restoration’s surface is finished initially with a very
fine prophylaxis paste applied with a cotton pellet or a nonribbed
rubber prophy cup rotated at slow speed and light pressure, a
smooth, velvety finish is achieved that will acquire a luster as the
restoration is abraded normally in the mouth. Spherical amalgams
set faster and can be finished and polished sooner.
If amalgam has hardened to an advanced stage in which the
abrasion by a fine prophylaxis paste is no longer effective, the following procedure may be used at the next dental appointment: (1)
Contour with slow-speed green stones or diamond burs or brown
and green rubber points, and (2) apply a mixture of fine pumice
and water or alcohol with a rotary brush or felt wheel to polish
the surface.

points (brown and green); (3) apply fine abrasive-impregnated rubber wheels, cups, and points; and (4) apply tripoli or rouge with rag
or leather wheels, if necessary.
Predominantly base-metal alloys, on the other hand, typically
exhibit much higher hardness and yield strengths. They are much
harder to finish. Burnishing these alloys is practically impossible.
A similar sequence is followed for predominantly base-metal alloys
but with more durable abrasive instruments that contain stronger binders. This means that the same carbide burs, stones, and
rubber-bonded abrasive instruments will degrade faster when used
on the harder alloys. If possible, select instruments with stronger abrasive binders that can withstand the higher abrasive forces
generated on these alloys. Fortunately, most manufacturers offer
material-specific lines of carbide burs and bonded abrasive wheels
and points.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the differences between finishing and polishing a ceramic
restoration extraorally and intraorally?

Ceramic Restorations
The ideal surface for a ceramic restoration is a polished and glazed
one. Esthetic areas are typically contoured and textured first before
being polished to a desired level of luster. Proximal and functional
contact areas must always be brought to their smoothest state in
order to cause the least possible wear under function. Natural
glaze (autoglaze) is preferred over the application of glaze ceramic
(overglaze). A natural glaze wears less over time because the glaze
is a fused surface of the underlying porcelain material as opposed
to a coating of weaker add-on glaze ceramic. Natural glazing is
not possible for zirconia and lithia disilicate. After polishing is
completed, the only glaze option is the application of glaze ceramics on esthetic, nonfunctional areas. Glazing does not necessarily
yield a smooth surface if the initial ceramic surface has significant
roughness. A desired smooth ceramic surface should be produced
through careful extraoral polishing prior to any glazing procedure.
Extraoral finishing and polishing instruments (Figure 16-15)
come in a wider variety, and access to all areas of the restoration

Dental Alloys
Pure gold, a noble metal, is a very soft and ductile metal. Gold is
almost never used in the purest form for dental restorations. Recall
the discussion in Chapter 2, Solid-State Reactions in High-Noble
and Noble Alloy Systems, that when alloyed with other metals such
as silver and copper, the resultant gold alloy becomes sufficiently hard
to withstand masticatory forces without creep or distortion. Many
dentists still prefer high-noble alloys because of their workability and
adaptability. This quality can be considered a favorable combination
of an adequately low yield strength with sufficient percent elongation
to allow for the burnishing of restoration margins. Lower-hardness
noble-metal alloys require a different finishing approach from that
used for the harder, predominantly base-metal alloys used in dentistry. Slow-speed handpieces should be used for finishing and polishing gold and softer noble alloys. This technique consists of the
following steps: (1) Contour with fine carbide burs, green stones
(silicon carbide) or heatless stones; (2) finish with pink or white
stones or medium-grade abrasive-impregnated rubber wheels and

• Figure 16-15 Extraoral porcelain finishing kit. Note bands on the mandrels (shanks) to distinguish the levels of abrasiveness. No band indicates
a standard prepolisher, yellow indicates a polisher, and white indicates a
super-polisher. (Courtesy Dr. Farzan Pouranfar.)

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

is possible. Intraorally, only minor roughness can be successfully polished with a different set of instruments (Figure 16-16)
without compromising the surface quality. Frictional heat is
detrimental to all ceramic materials, so adequate cooling is necessary whenever ceramic restorations are finished and polished. The
use of an air/water spray device and the maintenance of intermittent contact between the restoration and the rotary instrument are
critical during any intraoral adjustment operation. Continuous
contact between the restoration and the rotary instrument should
be avoided.
Manufacturers normally produce material-specific ceramic finishing and polishing kits based on the hardness and composition
of the ceramic. Figure 16-17 shows a typical set of two kits for
zirconia-based ceramics. Again, the manufacturers’ IFUs should
be followed when these systems are used.
Many new CAD-CAM ceramic materials come in a softer, more
machinable, presintered state and are intended to be machined
then prepolished prior to final sintering. They are designed this
way in order to permit grinding with reduced chipping damage
to delicate restoration margins, in addition to reducing wear on

347

milling burs. Depending on the dentist’s preference, a general
technique is as follows: (1) Contour or mill the ceramic surface
with bonded synthetic or natural diamond burs, wheels, and discs;
(2) separate milling sprues if necessary, texture, and prefinish with
synthetic diamond or aluminum-oxide stones followed by flexible polymer or rubber-bonded fine abrasive wheels, discs, cups,
and points (typically a two- or three-step process depending on
the material system used); (3) ultrasonically and/or steam-clean
polished surfaces thoroughly; (4) apply an overglaze layer or initiate natural glaze on the ceramic if necessary; and (5) final polish
with ultrafine abrasive-impregnated rubber discs, cups, and points
if necessary. The highest luster may be achieved using a diamond
paste applied with a brush or felt wheel. For intraoral adjustments
and polishing, use intermittent applications of rotary instruments
with copious amount of air/water spray.
Monolithic zirconia, Y-TZP based ceramic materials, is now
widely used. This material is incredibly hard to adjust and polish in a fully sintered state; these procedures can be done with
instruments specifically designed for zirconia (Figure 16-18),
but they are time-consuming. For those providing chairside

• Figure 16-16 Intraoral ceramic polishers for laminate veneer (Dialite intraoral polishers; Brasseler USA).
Abrasive levels are blue (coarse), pink (medium), and gray (fine). (Courtesy Dr. Farzan Pouranfar.)

• Figure 16-17 Typical finishing and polishing kits for zirconia ceramics: extraoral kit for laboratory use
(left) and intraoral kit for chairside use (right). Note that the extraoral kits for laboratory kits contain abrasives that will allow for heavier adjustments. (Courtesy Meisinger USA.)

348

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

CAD-CAM zirconia restorations, carefully contouring and
polishing milled zirconia restorations in their presintered
state is recommended so that the sintered restorations have
a near-perfect surface upon removal from the sintering furnace. This approach greatly reduces or eliminates the need for

postsintering finishing and polishing. Figure 16-19 shows that
milling markings will persist after sintering if not removed. In
addition to time savings, there are two additional advantages
to this approach: avoiding the risk of weakening the restoration from the conversion of the tetragonal zirconia phase to
the monoclinic phase caused by grinding (Chapter 10, Transformation Toughening) and eliminating the risk of creating
a displeasing pearl-like surface appearance to the restoration
from polishing.
As mentioned previously, leaving rough contact surfaces on zirconia restorations is not recommended. Rough zirconia will cause
severe wear of opposing enamel and restorative materials. Glaze
ceramic layers over rough zirconia will eventually wear and expose
the rough-milled surface of the zirconia (Figure 16-20), which can
cause greater wear on opposing enamel surfaces (Figure 16-21).
Lawson and colleagues demonstrated the advantages of placing
polished zirconia and lithia disilicate in opposing contact with
natural enamel.

Acrylic Resins for Denture Bases and Veneers
100m

Acrylic resins and other polymers are relatively soft materials.
To avoid overheating during finishing, a large amount of pumice slurry should be fed to the work surface as the denture is
moved against the rag wheel on the lathe. When using carbide
burs and rubber-bonded polishers, intermittent contact with the
substrate will help avoid overheating. The following technique
is recommended: (1) Contour with tungsten carbide burs and
sandpaper abrasive mandrels; (2) use a rubber-bonded abrasive
point to remove the scratches; (3) depending on the size of the
area that needs to be polished, apply pumice with a rag wheel,
felt wheel, bristle brush, or prophy cup; and (4) apply a mixture
of chalk and alcohol or bar-type acrylic polishing compounds
with a rag wheel.

A

Air-Particle Abrasion Technology
100m

B
• Figure 16-18 Effect of instrument on the polished surface. A, Zirconia
surface finished with a fine diamond bur. B, Zirconia surface polished using
the Dialite/Diashine system for zirconia. (Courtesy Dr. Siegward Heintze.)

As an alternative to the use of rotary instrument cutting, airparticle abrasive systems can deliver a fine, precisely controlled
high-pressure stream of 25- to 30-μm abrasive particles to
remove enamel, dentin, and restorative materials for cavity
preparation. Because air-particle abrasion generates minimal

• Figure 16-19 Effect of sintering on milled and partially prepolished zirconia crown. A, Presintered zirconia crown showing as-milled surface (left) and prepolished surface (right). B, Same restoration after fully
sintering. Note difference in smoothness and that sintering does not remove milling striations. (Courtesy
Dr. Troy Decker.)

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

349

2.0

1.5
mm
1.0
2.0

A

20m

1.5

0.5
1.0 mm
0.5
0.0 0.0

A

B

100m

• Figure 16-21 Scanning electron micrograph images of enamel stylus.
A, Abraded by glazed crowns. B, Abraded by optimally polished crowns.
(Courtesy Dr. Siegward Heintze.)

100m

B
• Figure 16-20 Wear facet of a milled and glazed ceramic after wear

TABLE 16-3

simulation. A, Three-dimensional image generated with FRT MicroProf
sensor. B, A scanning electron micrograph (×100). (Courtesy Dr. Siegward
Heintze.)

Product

heat and vibration, there is relatively little potential for tooth
chipping or microfracturing. These systems have been extended
to the following applications: endodontic access through porcelain crowns, minimal preparation for crown margin repair, tunnel preparations, superficial removal of stains, cleaning of tooth
surfaces before adhesive bonding, and roughening of internal
surfaces of indirect porcelain or composite restorations before
adhesive bonding.

Prophylaxis Paste Selection for Dental Hygiene
Procedures
The composition and particle size of abrasives contained in
various prophy pastes can have adverse effects on exposed
cementum and dentin surfaces and esthetic restorative materials. Table 16-3 shows the mean roughness values obtained

Effect of Prophylaxis Pastes on Glazed
Ceramic Surface Roughness
Surface Roughness

Proxyt coarse (Ivoclar Vivadent, Amherst, NY)

0.183 ± 0.08

Proxyt fine (Ivoclar Vivadent, Amherst, NY)

0.066 ± 0.03

Nupro coarse (Dentsply International, York, PA)

0.209 ± 0.11

Nupro fine (Dentsply International, York, PA)

0.188 ± 0.07

Control (glazed surface)

0.061 ± 0.03

on glazed ceramic surfaces after three rounds of 10-second
application of various prophy pastes by the same operator. Only one of the pastes (Proxyt Fine, Ivoclar Vivadent,
Amherst, NY) did not alter the surface smoothness significantly. Similarly, another study revealed the effect of the same
prophy pastes on the gloss reduction of a polished resin composite (Table 16-4).
Air-particle abrasion has been adapted for removing plaque
and stains from tooth surfaces using a sodium bicarbonate

350

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

slurry; the process is called air polishing. Air-particle abrasion
is more efficient and effective compared with the technique
using a rubber cup and prophylaxis paste because air polishing can access more tooth surfaces. However, softer restoration
surfaces, such as glass ionomer, can be damaged. Therefore
air polishing should be used with caution around cosmetic
restorations.

TABLE 16-4

Effect of Prophy Pastes on Polished
Composite Surface Gloss Reduction,
Measured by Gloss Units, After a
60-Second Application

Dentifrices
Tooth-cleaning substances, such as dentifrices, are available as
toothpastes, gels, and powders. Dentifrices have three important
functions: (1) Their abrasive and detergent actions provide more
efficient removal of debris, plaque, and stained pellicle compared
with the use of a toothbrush alone; (2) they polish teeth to provide
increased light reflectance and superior esthetic appearance, and the
high polish, as an added benefit, enables teeth to resist the accumulation of microorganisms and stains better than rougher surfaces;
and (3) they act as vehicles for the delivery of therapeutic agents
with known benefits—for example, anticaries agents, desensitizing
agents, antimicrobial agents, and antitartar agents.

Product

Mean GU ± SD

Dentifrice Composition

Nupro coarse

−40.86 ± 4.22a

Nupro fine

−40.57 ± 5.64a

Proxyt coarse

−41.61 ± 3.32a

Proxyt fine

−16.24 ± 3.34b

Typical components of dentifrices, along with specific materials
used and purpose, are listed in Table 16-5. The abrasive concentrations in paste and gel dentifrices are lower than those of powder dentifrices. Therefore powder dentifrices should be used more
sparingly and with greater caution by patients, especially where
cementum and dentin are exposed, to avoid excessive dentinal
abrasion and pulpal sensitivity.
Desensitizing agents in toothpastes work by either depolarizing nerve endings to reduce the transmission of pain, such as
with potassium nitrate, or by blocking dentinal tubules, such as
with stannous fluoride, sodium fluoride, and strontium chloride.

GU, gloss unit; SD, standard deviation.
The difference between mean values of groups represented by the same superscripts is not
statistically significant.

TABLE 16-5

Typical Dentifrice Components*
COMPOSITION (wt%)

Component

Pastes and Gels

Powders

Materials

Purpose

Abrasive

20–55

90–98

Calcium carbonate
Dibasic calcium phosphate dihydrate
Hydrated alumina
Hydrated silica
Sodium bicarbonate
Mixtures of listed abrasives

Removes plaque or stain
Polishes tooth surface

Detergent

1–2

1–6

Sodium lauryl sulfate

Aids in debris removal

Colorants

1–2

1–2

Food colorants

Are used for appearance

Flavoring

1–2

1–2

Oils of spearmint, peppermint,
wintergreen, or cinnamon

Provides flavor

Humectant

20–35

0

Sorbitol, glycerine

Maintains moisture content

Water

15–25

0

Deionized water

Acts as suspension agent

Binder

3

0

Carrageenan

As thickener, prevents liquid–solid
separation

Fluoride

0–1

0

Sodium monofluorophosphate
Sodium fluoride
Stannous fluoride

Prevents dental caries

Tartar control agents

0–1

0

Disodium pyrophosphate
Tetrasodium pyrophosphate
Tetrapotassium pyrophosphate

Inhibits formation of calculus above
the gingival margin

Desensitization agents

0–5

0

Potassium nitrate
Strontium chloride, stannous fluoride

Nerve desensitizing agent
Promotes occlusion of dentinal
tubules

*Some compositional information provided by Dr. George Stookey.

CHAPTER 16

Materials and Processes for Cutting, Grinding, Finishing, and Polishing

Antimicrobial agents such as stannous fluoride and triclosan
reduce gingivitis. Products advertised as “whitening toothpastes”
typically contain hydrogen peroxide or carbamide peroxide to
bleach intrinsic stains as an added benefit to the surface-stainremoval mechanism of any abrasive present.

Dentifrice Abrasiveness
Dentifrices do not have to be highly abrasive to clean teeth effectively. This is important because exposed root-surface cementum
is abraded at a rate of 35 times and dentin at 25 times the rate
of enamel. The preferred means of evaluating dentifrice abrasiveness is to employ irradiated dentin specimens and brush them
for several minutes with test and reference dentifrices. An abrasiveness ratio is calculated by dividing the amounts of radioactive
phosphorus (P32) released from the test dentifrice with that from
the reference dentifrice, and this value is multiplied by 1000. A
test dentifrice must obtain an abrasiveness score of 200 to 250
or less to satisfy the abrasiveness test requirements proposed by
the American Dental Association (ADA) and the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO). This means that a test
dentifrice must abrade dentin at 20% to 25% of the rate of the
reference standard to be considered safe for normal usage. A problem with this laboratory test is that the test does not account for
all variables that would affect abrasiveness under in vivo conditions. Some of the factors affecting dentifrice abrasiveness are
listed in Box 16-1.
Another problem is that not all dentifrices respond in a similar manner under this test. Therefore, using this laboratory test
Box 16-1

Factors Affecting Dentifrice Abrasiveness

Extraoral Factors
Abrasive particle type, size, and quantity in dentifrice
Amount of dentifrice used
Toothbrush type
Toothbrushing method and force applied during brushing
Toothbrushing frequency and duration
Patient’s coordination and mental status

Intraoral Factors
Saliva consistency and quantity (normal variations)
Xerostomia induced by drugs, salivary gland pathology, and radiation
therapy
Presence, quantity, and quality of existing dental deposits (pellicle, plaque,
calculus)
Exposure of dental root surfaces
Presence of restorative materials, dental prostheses, and orthodontic
appliances

351

rated four dozen dentifrices with regard to cleaning ability and
abrasiveness. The products are ranked as high, moderate, or low
in abrasiveness. That most of the evaluated products meet the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/ADA and ISO
test requirements is highly probable. Thus these rankings should
be considered a guide to products that do not exceed a maximum
acceptable (safe) abrasiveness value.

Toothbrushes
The bristle stiffness of toothbrushes alone has been shown to have
no effect on the abrasion of hard dental tissues. However, when a
dentifrice is used, there is evidence that more flexible toothbrush
bristles bend more readily and bring more abrasive particles into
contact with tooth structure, albeit with relatively light forces. This
interaction should produce more effective abrasion and cleaning
action on the areas that the bristles can reach. Battery-powered
toothbrushing devices provide a variety of cleansing actions that
are claimed to improve tooth-cleaning actions over those achieved
by manual toothbrushes.

Summary and Recommendations
Lab technicians, dentists, and dental hygienists should carefully select the appropriate abrasive system for each restoration.
Although using the same instruments for grinding and finishing
different materials is convenient, the quality of the finished tooth
or material surfaces may be far less than ideal if the optimal processes and abrasives recommended for specific materials are not
followed. For in vivo processes, use liquid coolant, whenever possible. In situations where a copious supply of liquid coolant is not
possible, intermittent application of polishing pressure should be
performed.
Change the orientation of the polishing path from one abrasive step to the next as successively finer and finer abrasives are
used. Use lighter pressure as the final stages of each abrasive step
are reached. The same grit, applied with lighter pressure, can produce a slightly finer surface. Ideally, use separate polishing instruments or carriers (e.g., brushes or rag wheels) for each abrasive
grit. Completely removing all coarse abrasive particles from an
instrument then reliably using the same instrument for a finer
abrasive is difficult, if not impossible. Inevitably, scratches from
stray coarse abrasive particles can occur. Similarly, thoroughly
clean coarser abrasives from restorations before moving to finer
abrasives. Rinse treated surfaces periodically to remove wear
debris that may interfere with the ability to produce the finest
possible surface finish.

to predict the in vivo abrasiveness of various dentifrices is very
difficult or impossible. However, the majority of modern dentifrices are not exceedingly abrasive. Patients should experience
similar amounts of relative wear from the various dentifrices as
those found in laboratory tests. In fact, one published document

Acknowledgment

Selected Readings

Jones CS, Billington RW, Pearson GJ: The in vivo perception of roughness of restorations, Brit Dent J 196:42–45, 2004.
The tactile ability of the tongue to discern very small changes in surface roughness intraorally are suggested in this study.
Kroschwitz JI, Howe-Grant M, editors: Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia
of Chemical Technology, ed 4, vol 1, New York, 1991, Wiley,
pp 17–37.
This encyclopedia presents a thorough review of specific abrasives,
their physical properties, and their methods of manufacture.

Fruits TJ, Miranda FJ, Coury TL: Effects of equivalent grit sizes utilizing
different polishing motions on selected restorative materials, Quintessence Int 27:279–285, 1996.
Hutchings IM: Tribology: Friction and Wear of Engineering Materials,
Boca Raton, FL, 1992, CRC Press.
This publication thoroughly describes the scientific basis of friction,
wear, and lubrication.

The contributions of Dr. Kenneth Anusavice and Dr. Sibel
Antonson to the development of this chapter in the 11th and
12th editions are appreciated.

352

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Lawson NC, Janyavula S, Syklawer S, et al: Wear of enamel opposing
zirconia and lithium disilicate after adjustment, polishing and glazing,
J Dent 42:1586–1591, 2014.
This article shows that polished zirconia wears less and polished lithium disilicate wears equivalent to natural enamel. Glazes should not
be applied to contacting surfaces.
Mackert JR: Side effects of dental ceramics, Adv Dent Res 6:90–93,
1992.
This article presents information on silicosis and the potential hazards
of porcelain dust generation during grinding procedures.
Nakazato T, Takahashi H, Yamamoto M, et al: Effects of polishing
on cyclic fatigue strength of CAD/CAM ceramics, Dent Mater J
18:395–402, 1999.

Powers JM, Bayne SC: Friction and wear of dental materials. In Henry
SD, editor: Friction Lubrication and Wear Technology, ASM Handbook,
vol 18, Materials Park, OH, 1992, American Society of Metals International, 1992, pp 665–681.
This article, a compilation of information from more than 200
sources, presents a review of friction and wear as they relate to human
dental tissues and restorative materials.
Williamson RT, Kovarik RE, Mitchell RJ: Effects of grinding, polishing,
and over glazing on the flexure strength of a high-leucite feldspathic
porcelain, Int J Prosthodont 9:30–37, 1996.
Yamamoto M: Metal-Ceramics. Chicago, 1985, Quintessence, pp 124–130.
This volume discusses the preparation of metal-ceramic alloys for
porcelain application, including several excellent photographs.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Carr MP, Mitchell JC, Seghi RR, et al: The effect of air polishing on contemporary esthetic restorative materials, Gen Dent 50:238–241, 2002.
This article describes the effects of air polishing on different dental
materials.
Cooley RL: Aerosol hazards. In Goldman HS, Hartman KS, Messite J,
editor: Occupational Hazards in Dentistry, Chicago, 1984, Yearbook
Medical, pp 21–33.
Sources of dental aerosols, their hazards, and preventive measures are
presented.
Fairhust CW, Lockwood PE, Ringle RD, et al: The effect of glaze on
porcelain strength, Dent Mater 8:203–207, 1992.
Fruits TJ, Miranda FJ, Coury TL: Effects of equivalent grit sizes utilizing
different polishing motions on selected restorative materials, Quintessence Int 27:279–285, 1996.
González-Cabezas C, Hara AT, Hefferren J: Abrasivity testing of dentifrices—challenges and current state of the art, Monogr Oral Sci
23:100–107, 2013.
Hefferren JJ: Laboratory method for assessment of dentifrice abrasivity,
J Dent Res 55:563–573, 1976.
This reference describes the dentifrice abrasiveness test.
Hutchings IM: Leonardo da Vinci’s studies of friction, Wear 360–361:
51−56, 2016.
This reference provides insightful analysis of Leonardo’s unpublished
experiments in friction using his original diagrams.
Hutchings IM: Tribology: Friction and Wear of Engineering Materials,
Boca Raton, FL, 1992, CRC Press.
This publication thoroughly describes the scientific basis of friction,
wear, and lubrication.
Jones CS, Billington RW, Pearson GJ: The in vivo perception of roughness of restorations, Brit Dent J 196:42–45, 2004.
The tactile ability of the tongue to discern very small changes in surface roughness intraorally are suggested in this study.
Kroschwitz JI, Howe-Grant M, editors: Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, ed 4, vol 1, New York, 1991, Wiley, pp 17–37.
This encyclopedia presents a thorough review of specific abrasives,
their physical properties, and their methods of manufacture.
Lawson NC, Janyavula S, Syklawer S, et al: Wear of enamel opposing
zirconia and lithium disilicate after adjustment, polishing and glazing,
J Dent 42:1586–1591, 2014.
This article shows that polished zirconia wears less and polished lithium disilicate wears equivalent to natural enamel. Glazes should not
be applied to contacting surfaces.

352.e1

Mackert JR: Side effects of dental ceramics, Adv Dent Res 6:90–93, 1992.
This article presents information on silicosis and the potential hazards
of porcelain dust generation during grinding procedures.
Nakazato T, Takahashi H, Yamamoto M, et al: Effects of polishing on
cyclic fatigue strength of CAD/CAM ceramics, Dent Mater J 18:395–
402, 1999.
Phark J-H, Huh I, Botta AC, Duarte S, et al: Influence of tooth brushing
on surface roughness of restorative materials, J Dent Res 89(Special
Issue A):1052, 2010.
Powers JM, Bayne SC: Friction and wear of dental materials. In Henry
SD, editors: Friction Lubrication and Wear Technology, ASM Handbook
vol 18, Materials Park, OH, 1992, American Society of Metals International, pp 665–681.
This article, a compilation of information from more than 200
sources, presents a review of friction and wear as they relate to human
dental tissues and restorative materials.
Proxyt Scientific Documentation, Ivoclar Vivadent, 2011: http://www.ivoclarvivadent.us/en-us/download-center/scientific-documentation/#P.
This document outlines the principles of professional prophylaxis,
including the properties of prophy pastes and their effects on dental
tissues and various restorative surfaces.
Ratterman E, Cassidy R: Abrasives. In Lampman SR, Woods M, Zorc TP,
editors: Engineered Materials Handbook, vol 4, Ceramics and Glasses,
Materials Park, OH, 1991, American Society of Metals International,
pp 329–335.
A system for selecting abrasives for glasses and ceramics based on a
comparison of physical properties is presented. Mechanical property
tables are presented for several materials.
Stookey GK, Burkhard TA, Schemehorn BR: In vitro removal of stain
with dentifrices, J Dent Res 61:1236–1239, 1982.
The method used to measure the cleaning effectiveness of a dentifrice
is presented.
Williamson RT, Kovarik RE, Mitchell RJ: Effects of grinding, polishing,
and over glazing on the flexure strength of a high-leucite feldspathic
porcelain, Int J Prosthodont 9:30–37, 1996.
Yamamoto M: Metal-Ceramics, Chicago, 1985, Quintessence, pp 124–130.
This volume discusses the preparation of metal-ceramic alloys for porcelain application, including several excellent photographs.
Yazici AR, Antonson D, Campillo-Funollet M, et al: Effect of prophylactic pastes on composite surface gloss, J Dent Res 90(Special Issue
A):3046, 2011.
This abstract outlines the study showing the effect of different prophylactic pastes on the gloss of resin composite.

Part V

Assessing Dental Restorations
17 Biocompatibility, 355
18 In Vitro Research on Dental Materials, 381
19 Clinical Research on Restorations, 390
20 Emerging Technologies, 401

353

17

Biocompatibility
OUTLINE
Basic Concept of Biocompatibility

Side Effect of Various Material Groups

Biological Effects From Exposure to Dental Materials

Patient Reports and Complaints of Adverse Effects

Occupational Hazards for Dental Personnel

Clinical Guidelines for Selecting Biocompatible Materials

Biocompatibility Testing

Acknowledgments

Legal Regulations and Risk Classes

KEY TERMS
GENERAL
Adverse reaction Any unintended, unexpected, and harmful response of an individual to a (dental) treatment or
biomaterial.
Bioactive materials Biomaterials that, in addition to their primary
function (e.g., to restore dental hard tissues), actively stimulate
a specific positive tissue response or control their microbiologic
environment.
Biocompatibility The ability of a biomaterial to perform its
desired function with respect to a medical (or dental) therapy,
without eliciting any undesirable local, allergic, or systemic effects in the recipient or beneficiary of that therapy but generating the most appropriate beneficial cellular or tissue response
in that specific situation and optimizing the clinically relevant
performance of that therapy.
Biointegration The process of forming an interface between
bone or other living tissue and an implanted material with
no intervening space. Biocompatibility is a prerequisite for
biointegration.
Osseointegration The process of forming a direct structural and
functional interface between live bone and an artificial implant
surface without any intervening fibrous connective tissue. Biocompatibility is a prerequisite for osseointegration.
Risk Combination of the probability of harm to health occurring
as a result of adverse reactions associated with a biomaterial
interaction and the severity of that harm.
Safety The absence (freedom) from unacceptable risks in the
context of the intended use.
Xenoestrogen A chemical that is not indigenous to the body but
acts in a manner similar to that of estrogen.

BIOLOGICAL OR CLINICAL EFFECTS
Allergy A clinical hypersensitivity reaction initiated by specific
immunological mechanisms.

Carcinogenicity Malignant tumor formation caused, for example,
by an exposure to a chemical or biomaterial.
Cytotoxicity Cell death or impairment of cell metabolism caused
by an exposure to a chemical or biomaterial.
Estrogenicity Body reaction in a manner similar to that of estrogen, the female sex hormone, from exposure to a chemical or
biomaterial.
Genotoxicity A change of the DNA or of chromosomes caused, for
example, by an exposure to a chemical or biomaterial.
Hypersensitivity The objectively reproducible symptoms or signs
initiated by an exposure to a defined stimulus at a dose tolerated by normal persons.
Mutagenicity A change of the DNA or of chromosomes, which is
transferred to the next cell generation, caused, for example, by
an exposure to a chemical or biomaterial.
Sensitization The process by which antibodies or specific immune
cells are produced, which react specifically to the causative
foreign substance.
Toxicity The relative ability (dose-related effect) of a substance
or a material to cause injury to biological tissues, ranging
from improper biochemical function, organ damage, and cell
destruction to death. Depending on the duration of exposure
period, the terms acute toxicity (≤24 hours), subacute toxicity
(>24 hours but ≤30 days), and chronic toxicity (>30 days) are
used.

LIMIT VALUES
Lethal dose fifty (LD50) The calculated dose of a substance that is
expected to cause the death of 50% of the entire population of
a biological collective, such as specific experimental animals or
cells.
No-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) The highest tested
dose of a substance that has been reported to have no harmful
(adverse) health effects on people, animals, or cells.

355

356

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Since ancient times, a wide variety of materials have been placed
or implanted in humans to replace or repair missing, damaged,
or defective body tissues. Animal bones, seashells, animal teeth,
human teeth, metals, resin materials, and inorganic compounds
are materials that have been used for restoration of damaged or
decayed teeth or replacement of missing teeth. The outcomes of
these interventions have varied from short-term failure to limited
success in certain individuals. Many of these treatments reflected
situations in which the risks were far greater than the anticipated benefits. Some of these materials have caused immediate
or delayed adverse reactions because of their allergenic or toxic
potentials. On the other hand, some materials appear to evoke a
minimal biological response but seem to interact with the host tissue harmoniously. Thus the term biocompatible evolves.

Basic Concept of Biocompatibility
Biocompatibility is related to the fact that a (dental) material that
is placed on or in parts of the human body comes into close contact
with living tissue, with the consequence of an interaction between
the material and the tissue. This interaction is primarily based
on the substances that are eluted (i.e., released) from the material when in contact with various tissues; released substances then
in turn influence the living tissues (Figure 17-1). Furthermore,
such released substances can influence the surrounding microbiota (e.g., biofilms), which then indirectly affects the tissue, such
as inducing a bacterial inflammation. Nanoparticles originating
from dental materials during processing (grinding or polishing)
or during restoration removal can also interact with cells. Finally,
the influence of disposing dental material wastes to the environment has gained increased concern. For example, amalgam debris
discharged from dental offices enters water treatment plants and
then landfills as sewage waste. The mercury in amalgam is released
to ground water or air and eventually enters the food chain, which
may influence human health. Thus the primary purpose of characterizing the biocompatibility of dental materials is the protection
of the patient, the dental personnel, and the environment.
The adverse effects of a material lead to the awareness of biocompatibility. Adverse reactions caused by dental restorative materials
can be classified into three groups: systemic effects, local effects,
and allergies. Systemic effects are those where the site of application

Release of substances,
nanoparticles

Waste

is distant from the site of action. For example, mercury vapor
from amalgam fillings reaches different organs through inhalation
and then the bloodstream, with (claimed) adverse effects at these
organs (Figure 17-2). Local effects occur in the direct vicinity of the
material applied. This can be an inflammation of the dental pulp
after placement of a resin-based composite restoration in a deep
cavity or inflammation of the gingiva next to a resin-based restoration (Figure 17-3) or a metal prosthesis (Figure 17-4). Allergies
are based on an immunological antibody–antigen reaction leading
to a number of clinical symptoms that occur more frequently than
systemic effects. The adverse effects are discussed in detail in the
next section.
Bioactivity can be regarded as an intended positive local effect
of dental materials in addition to their primary function (e.g.,
to restore dental hard tissues). The term bio means “life/living.”
Therefore bioactive effects are primarily related to material-induced
and cell-mediated effects on living tissues like the dental pulp.
Examples are the induction of new dentin formation by calcium
hydroxide products. Also, antimicrobial activity may be regarded
as a bioactive effect. Some manufacturers and authors broaden the
term bioactivity to include a mainly inorganic chemically induced
remineralization of dental hard tissues or the formation of an apatite-like substance on the surface. Therefore materials that release
Ca2+, (PO4)3–, or F–, which are necessary components for forming apatite, are termed bioactive materials or smart materials by
manufacturers. The clinician should be critical and ask for actual
clinical evidence of such claims based on clinical studies and
ensure that the necessary properties of the restorative materials
for fulfilling their primary use are not impaired as a result of the
release of molecules.
In daily life, the assessment of the biocompatibility of dental
materials is often expressed in terms of risk and safety. “Safety”
in layperson terms is often meant to describe a situation where
harm will never happen. But such an “absolute safety” is not possible. There is always a chance, however small it may be, that an
adverse event may happen. Interestingly, high-risk activities, such
as mountain climbing, are engaged in by patients without any
major concern, but the same patients are afraid of certain dental materials (e.g., amalgam) or of certain procedures (e.g., dental x-rays). This indicates that the risk perception of the patient
is purely intuitive, and it is not related to the actual risk. The

Environment,
e.g., water treatment plants,
ground water, fish, atmosphere

Food chain

Contact of tissue/tissue fluids,
e.g., gingiva, pulp, saliva with materials
Nanoparticles

Material

Release of substances

Tissue
Barriers

Release of substances/
surface effects

Bacteria
accumulation

• Figure 17-1 Basic concept of the interaction of dental materials with tissues. Orange arrows indicate
the action of the tissues on the material. Cyan arrows show the action of the materials/their eluates on
the tissues, and brown arrows show the bacteria-mediated interaction. Blue arrows indicate the effect of
materials on the environment, which then also may influence human health. (Adapted from Schmalz G,
Galler KM: Biocompatibility of biomaterials, Dent Mater 33:382–393, 2017.)

CHAPTER 17

Biocompatibility

LOCAL EFFECTS

SYSTEMIC EFFECTS

Skin, lips, and oral mucosa
Inflammation: Non-allergic, allergic
Allergy: Burning mouth, erythema,
vesicles, lichenoid lesions
Cause: Metals, acrylics, latex

Toxicity: Neurobehavioral effects,
multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer,
Parkinson disease, epilepsy
Cause: Unknown

357

Brain and nervous system

Lung
Toxicity: Pneumoconiosis
Cause: Silica, beryllium, asbestos,
grinding dusts, vapors, fumes

• Figure 17-2 Schematic illustration of critical tissues and organs that may be susceptible to the adverse
effects of dental materials.

• Figure 17-3 Inflammatory response or possible allergic reaction adjacent to a Class V resin-based composite. However, no patch test was
performed to confirm an allergy as the cause of this inflammation. (Courtesy Dr. Hyun-Ju Chung.)

actual risk is the combination of the probability and the severity of harm that can be evaluated according to ISO 14971:2019,
Medical Devices—Application of Risk Management to Medical
Devices. Therefore, when informing the patients about possible
adverse effects from dental materials, the clinician must consider
the difference between the public’s perception and the measurable
estimation in terms of risk and safety by ISO 14971:2019.
Finally, risk versus benefit has to be assessed before a material is
allowed to be sold on the market. Dental (and medical) materials
are used to diagnose, prevent, and alleviate disease (e.g., caries)
or restore lost teeth structure. An example is mercury, which is
an element that is poisonous to human health and has been used
to form amalgam as a dental restoration for restoring function of
teeth damaged by caries. However, mercury should not be used in
shoes to switch on lights for fun.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Why might the local response and the systemic response to a dental material
differ? Which factors come into play to explain these differences?

• Figure 17-4 Inflammatory response adjacent to a crown (lower right)
made from a metal coping. No definitive diagnosis can be made of potential allergens. Thorough dental and medical histories and patch testing are
required for the evaluation of this condition. (Courtesy Dr. Hyun-Ju Chung.)

Biological Effects From Exposure to Dental
Materials
There are five main pathways through which harmful substances
can enter the body: (1) absorption through skin/mucosa/dentin
and eye contact, (2) leakage through the tooth apex, (3) direct
contact with bone (implants), (4) inhalation, and (5) ingestion.
Keep in mind that skin, mucosa, and dentin act as a (partial) barrier against the entry of foreign substances into the body. If this
protective barrier is broken by abrasions or lacerations, toxic substances can penetrate the barrier and migrate into the body. In
addition, exposure to some organic solvents or inorganic acids can
increase the permeability of the skin, mucosa, and dentin. The
fastest way for toxic substances to enter the body is through inhalation (Figure 17-2) or in direct contact with bone. Inhaled vapors
or particulate matter can make immediate contact with respiratory
tissues and soon thereafter make contact with the bloodstream.
Once a substance has entered the bloodstream, this substance is
transported rapidly throughout the body.

358

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Systemic Effects of Materials
Systemic effects from dental materials are a function of the distribution of substances released from dental materials in the body. Their
migration to other sites of the body can occur by diffusion through
tissues or by flow through lymphatic channels or blood vessels.
The ultimate systemic response depends on six key variables: (1)
site of exposure, (2) the intrinsic (i.e., molecular) toxicity, (3) the
effective concentration of the substance at the site of action, (4)
the time of exposure, (5) the excretion rate of the substance, and
(6) the target organ (site of action). When substances are excreted
slowly, their critical concentrations are reached more rapidly than
are those concentrations of substances that are excreted quickly.

CMR Effects
The term CMR effects refers to carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, and
reproductive toxicity. Any adverse effect on the DNA of an organism caused by a chemical or a material is termed genotoxicity. If
the adverse effect is transferred to the next (heritable) generation
of cells, the effect is called mutagenicity. Thus genotoxicity can
be regarded as the first and necessary step for mutagenicity. Genotoxic reactions occur when a physical or chemical agent changes
the genetic material of an organism. Mutations are common
occurrences in the DNA of all humans, and they may result from
many factors, such as radiation, genotoxic chemicals, and genetic
errors in the DNA replication process. Several metal ions, such as
beryllium, cobalt, and nickel, are known mutagens. Some components in root canal sealers and resin-based materials have exhibited
mutagenic potential in vitro. Mutagenicity does not have the same
consequences as carcinogenicity, and many mutations are repaired.
Others are irrelevant or insignificant, or the affected cell undergoes
apoptosis, preventing the transfer of the DNA damage to the next
cell generation. No dental material has ever been shown to be carcinogenic in dental patients. Reproductive toxicity plays virtually no
role in dental materials but has to be considered during preclinical
risk assessments performed by the manufacturer.
Estrogenicity
Estrogenicity is the ability of a chemical to act as the hormone
estrogen does in the body. If these chemicals are not indigenous to
the body, the substances are called xenoestrogens. In 1996 Olea
et al. claimed that dental sealants released estrogenic substances in
sufficient quantities to warrant concern. The compound of concern
is called bisphenol-A (BPA), which is a precursor of the bisphenolA glycidyl dimethacrylate (bis-GMA) monomer widely used in the
formulation of dental composites and sealants and a building block
of plastics like the polycarbonates used in some orthodontic brackets. BPA is a known xenoestrogen. The fear is that the release of
these substances from dental materials will compound exposure to
other (nondental) sources of endocrine disruptors, which in turn
may lead to (claimed!) diseases such as type 2 diabetes, obesity,
premature puberty, and even (breast) cancer, albeit such claims are
highly controversial. The amounts of BPA released from dental resin
composites are very low. Therefore the estrogenicity of dental composites has also been questioned, particularly for use in children. For
more details, see the discussion on resin-based composites.

Local Effects of Materials
The arrows in Figure 17-5 indicate the pathways that foreign substances from a restorative material can take leading into the oral
cavity (OC), the tissue space next to the periodontium (PD), the

R
OC
D

P

PD

PA

• Figure 17-5 Schematic illustration of pathways that leached ions or
substances may follow during in vivo degradation of a dental restoration
(R) into the oral cavity (OC), dentin (D), the pulp chamber and the pulp tissue (P), the periodontium (PD), and periapical tissue and bone (PA).

pulp chamber (P), or the periapical region (PA). Local effects that
occur on nearby oral tissues such as the buccal mucosa, the periodontium, or tongue are generally apparent to visual inspection.
Local effects also occur, often hidden from our eyesight, including
in the pulp tissue, tooth–restoration interfaces, and bone–implant
interfaces.

Pulp Tissue
Postoperative discomfort/sensitivity or pain, which may occur
shortly after the treatment with dental restorative materials, may
result from several factors, including thermal trauma, chemical
injury, microleakage, and allergy. The perception of this postoperative sensitivity is generally believed to be related to the movement
of extracellular fluid in the dentinal tubules and the influence of
this fluid movement on the odontoblastic processes, as proposed
in the so-called hydrodynamic theory of postoperative sensitivity.
As a result of this movement, cell receptors on the surface of the
odontoblast processes are stimulated, and the odontoblasts transfer this signal to afferent nerves, which are closely associated with
the odontoblast layer. Therefore sealing the dentinal tubules during the restorative procedure is clinically important to prevent
or reduce intratubular fluid movement and thus postoperative
sensitivity.
Pulp damage (inflammation) caused by a restorative material
may very often occur without any clinical symptoms at the beginning and is only detected histologically. The intratubular fluid
becomes the medium for the diffusion of foreign substances into
the pulp chamber. However, the thickness of the remaining dentin
between the material and the pulp chamber can slow down the
process, and dentinal sclerosis under a carious lesion will further
decrease the dentin permeability. Furthermore, dentin may act as
a buffer for acidic substances like self-etch adhesives. Therefore
dentin can be regarded as a partial barrier. A major problem in the

CHAPTER 17

diagnosis of potential pulp damage caused by a restoration is the
fact that there is virtually no correlation between the histologically
documented damage to the pulp and clinical symptoms. This is
considered a major drawback of clinical studies (without histology) in this area.

Dentin
Enamel
“Pocket”

Pulp
chamber

Cementum

Cortical
bone

Periodontium
The periodontal attachment to the tooth is an important junction
between the outside of the body (oral cavity) and the inside of the
body (Figure 17-6). The periodontal tissues are targets for possible adverse effects from dental materials because these materials
are in close proximity to these tissues. The periodontal pocket, or
gingival sulcus, may accumulate biofilms and significant concentrations of ions or molecules of leached substances. Such accumulations can elicit inflammatory reactions such as gingivitis or
influence the body’s ability to defend against bacteria that cause
periodontal disease.

How can microleakage influence the biological response to a material?

Periodontal
ligament

Alveolar
bone

Spongy
bone

• Figure 17-6 Schematic illustration of the periodontal attachment area.
The gingiva is attached to the tooth’s cementum surface just below the
enamel with a specialized epithelium, which is called the junctional epithelium. The periodontal “pocket” is formed from the gingival tissue extension
above the junctional epithelium. Cementum covers the dentin, starting at
the enamel–dentin junction. Below the gingiva, alveolar bone attaches to
cementum through a tissue called the periodontal ligament. This ligament
is not present when implants are osseointegrated with bone.

Tooth–Restoration Interfaces—Microleakage and
Nanoleakage
Dental restorative materials form interfaces with one another (adhesives with resin composites or cements with dental alloys) and with
the dental hard tissues. The tooth–restoration interface is critical
for the transfer of leached substances into dentinal fluid. As shown
in Figure 17-7, debonding of the adhesive layer from the dentin,
as a result of, for example, polymerization stress, can lead to fluid
ingress along gaps, which leads to so-called microleakage, or the diffusion of bacteria and fluids into this gap. The microscopic gap and
the microleakage may lead to several undesirable events. Bacteria
may migrate into this gap and may even form a thin biofilm, which
then initiates an inflammation of the pulp tissue. The gap also promotes material breakdown and secondary caries along the unsupported margin. This breakdown increases the gap width, which
allows larger particles and molecules to progress toward the pulp
chamber. The presence of this gap also causes marginal staining and
compromised esthetics that may lead to restoration replacement.
If the resin from dental adhesives penetrates the collagen
network of the acid-treated dentin but does not penetrate the

Composite resin

Resin-impregnated
collagen mesh

Microleakage

R

Partially demineralized
dentin

Nanoleakage

DT

Unaffected
dentin

D

A

359

CRITICAL QUESTION

Junctional
epithelium

Gingiva

Biocompatibility

B
• Figure 17-7 Concepts of microleakage and nanoleakage. A, Cross section of Class I composite restoration. B, Diagram illustrating the interphase of bonding resins (R) to dentin (D). The dentin has been
acid-etched in preparation for the application of the resin adhesive, which leaves the collagenous matrix of
the dentin exposed (demineralized dentin). If the resin does not completely penetrate the collagen network
(left), then a small space of communication exists between the tubules (DT) and the collagen network
(red arrow, left). This situation allows for nanoleakage. On the other hand, if the resin fails to penetrate the
collagen network at all, or debonds from it, then the space is much larger (red arrow, right). This situation
allows for microleakage. In the ideal situation (center), the resin penetrates the collagen network all the
way to the mineralized dentin.

360

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

network completely, then a much smaller gap (less than 0.1 μm in
most cases) may develop between the mineralized matrix of dentin and the collagen–resin hybrid layer (Figure 17-7). This much
smaller gap may lead to nanoleakage, which probably does not
permit bacteria penetration but allows fluid exchange that may
degrade the resin or the collagen network and subsequently reduce
the longevity of the dentin–resin bond.
Micromechanical interlocking occurs between the bonding of
resins from dental adhesives to enamel. Enamel does not contain
collagens, and the bond to resin is based on the interlocking of the
resin with the etched enamel surface and potentially on chemical
bonding between the resin and the enamel apatite (for 10-methacryloyloxydecyl dihydrogen phosphate [MDP]-based adhesives).
Therefore nanoleakage is not known to occur between restorations
and enamel.

Bone–Implant Interface
The success of endosseous dental implants depends on the stability of the implant, which is determined by the biomechanical properties of the bone–implant interface. The initial stability
is gained from introducing the implant into a prepared cavity slightly smaller than the size of implant, which allows the
implants to be threaded into bone. The final stability is achieved
by the ingrowth and integration of new bone onto the implant
surface through the process of osseointegration. Materials that
allow osseointegration have very low degradation rates, and they
tend to form biocompatible surface oxides that enhance bony
approximation. The general process of biointegration involves
the adaptation of bone or other tissue to the implanted material
without any intervening space along the tissue–material interface. The majority of current dental implants are made of commercially pure titanium or titanium alloys (Chapter 12, Titanium
and Titanium Alloys).

A

B

Allergic Reactions
An allergic reaction occurs when the body recognizes a substance,
molecule, or ion as foreign, and the human immune system can
react specifically even at a very low dose. The reactions are well
recognized by the public, but specific allergens are difficult for
health care professionals to identify.
There are four types of allergy reactions according to the Gell
and Coombs classification of immune responses proposed in
1963. A type I reaction (mediated by immunoglobulin E [IgE]
or immunoglobulin G4 [IgG4]) is an immediate hypersensitive reaction or anaphylactic reaction when an antigen interacts
with mast cells or basophils. A type II reaction is caused by cytotoxic antibodies, which are primarily immunoglobulin M (IgM)
or immunoglobulin G (IgG). A type III reaction involves tissue
injury by immune complexes. A type IV reaction is a delayed or
cell-mediated hypersensitivity, and it is evoked, for example, by
metal ions, which, as so-called haptens, must first interact with a
host molecule (protein) in order to be able to produce a delayed
type IV hypersensitivity reaction. This type is often associated
with an allergic contact dermatitis. A type V reaction, which is a
stimulating antibody reaction, has been suggested but sometimes
classified as a subcategory of type II. In dentistry, allergy type IV
reactions (delayed type) are generally more frequent than type I
reactions (immediate reactions).
Figure 17-8 illustrates three potential sites for allergic reactions
to nickel-containing metals: a watchband buckle (Figure 17-8,
A); bilateral, fixed metal-ceramic prostheses with copings and

C
• Figure 17-8 Various forms of nickel allergy. A, Allergic reaction to nickel
alloy in watchband buckle. B, Bilateral erythema in a female patient that
may have been associated with allergic reactions to nickel in a recently
cemented metal-ceramic crown (left) and in two metal-ceramic crowns
(right) of a three-unit fixed dental prosthesis. C, Severe allergic reaction in
the lips of a patient who was exposed to a nickel-containing orthodontic
wire. (C, Courtesy Dr. Donald Cohen.)

framework made from nickel alloy (Figure 17-8, B); and a severe
reaction of lips to nickel-containing wire (Figure 17-8, C).

Frequencies
Dental professionals suffer hand dermatitis from frequent hand
washing, prolonged glove use, and exposure to skin-irritating and
skin-sensitizing chemicals in their working environment, particularly methacrylate-based monomers. In one study, nearly 2% of
dental personnel were reported to suffer from methacrylate-caused
hand dermatitis. Contact allergy to methacrylate was seen in 22%
of the patch-tested persons. Other frequent allergens are nickel,
cobalt, palladium, fragrance mix, colophonium, and thiuram mix.
Allergy to natural rubber latex was diagnosed in 10% of the dental
personnel. In summary, chemical-irritant hand dermatitis was the
dominant diagnosis.

CHAPTER 17

Dental patients usually present with different manifestations
of the oral mucosa. In a group of more than 4000 people with a
clinically suspected allergy against dental materials, the most frequent allergic patch test reactions in the dental screening series
were induced by nickel, ammoniated mercury, metallic mercury,
gold, benzoic acid, palladium, cobalt, and 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA). Moreover, triethylene glycol dimethacrylate
(TEGDMA) was found to be a frequent sensitizer. Other studies
have reported chromium and indium as allergens. Positive reactions to metals were frequent in patients with different symptoms,
and no specific association between a specific clinical presentation
and a particular allergen was found.
A maximal frequency of 0.3% for any adverse effect and for all
dental materials has been reported, meaning the frequency of just
allergic reactions of patients may be even lower. Within the group
of patients claiming that their subjective complaints or objective
symptoms are the result of applied dental materials, the rate of allergic reactions was found to range between 10% and 14%. Within
another group of patients who also exhibit clinical symptoms of
an allergy (see following discussion), the rate of positive patch tests
(i.e., verification of an allergy) was between 40% and 60%.

361

cells specifically directed to this substance. After sensitization to
the particular substance, even a brief contact with that allergen
may cause the allergic reaction to appear. Dental materials mainly
elicit delayed-type reactions (type IV), occurring within 24 to 48
hours or even later. A typical type IV reaction to dental materials
is contact dermatitis. One of the most common signs is a change
in the color of the skin/mucosa, which usually appears on the spot
that was in contact with the material. Other areas of the body can
exhibit signs after the initial reaction has occurred. The general
signs of contact allergies include (1) reddish, itchy, swollen skin;
(2) vesicles; (3) scaly areas; (4) darkening of affected tissue; (5)
leathery skin; and (6) cracked skin. The best “cures” for these reactions are avoidance of the suspected materials.

Inflammation
Inflammation may result from microbes/biofilms, trauma (i.e.,
excessive force, laceration, and abrasion), allergy, or toxicity. Histologically, the inflammatory response is initially characterized by
edema of the tissue and by an infiltration of inflammatory cells
such as neutrophils and, later in the chronic stage, by the action of
monocytes/macrophages and lymphocytic cells. For the clinician,
it is important to identify the reason for an apparent inflammation
in order to be able to correctly treat the patient.
A rather frequent reason for an inflammation of the oral soft
tissues/oral mucosa is bacterial biofilms on or under a dental
material. Antibacterial treatment comprises mechanical cleaning of teeth and possibly removable prostheses, improving the
patient’s own oral hygiene measures, and the use of antiseptic
mouth rinses. If the inflammation subsides, bacterial biofilm can
be regarded as the reason for the inflammation. If the inflammation persists, and the suspected material is part of a removable
prosthesis, this prosthesis should be removed from the mouth
for 1 or 2 weeks (elimination test). If the inflammation subsides
and reappears after insertion, an allergy can be suspected, and a
patch test should be initiated. Figure 17-10 shows an erythematous reaction caused by an acrylic appliance that subsided 2 to 3
days after removal of the appliance. The same is true if inflammation persists after antimicrobial treatment and the material
cannot be removed from the mouth. Other material-associated
soft tissue inflammations are caused by marginal discrepancies of
metallic fixed prostheses (Chapter 9, Manipulation of Base-Metal
Alloys) and ill-fitting removable prostheses (Chapter 11, Allergic
Reactions). Gingivitis adjacent to metal-ceramic crowns may also
be caused by insufficient removal of metal oxides after the firing

Symptoms
For dental personnel with a verified allergy to dental materials,
the symptoms found among 174 cases were hand eczema (63%),
irritant contact dermatitis (67%), and allergy-induced contact
dermatitis (33%). Further diagnoses included other eczemas, urticaria, rosacea, psoriasis, tinea pedis, and bullous pemphigoid.
Exposure of patients to dental materials and other products can
elicit symptoms such as burning, tingling, cheilitis, and oral lichenoid contact lesions, as well as swelling of the face, lips, tongue, palate, and buccal mucosa. Between 2000 and 2004, patch tests of
121 patients aged 20 to 80 years revealed that the most frequent
oral manifestations were cheilitis and perioral dermatitis (25.6%),
burning mouth (15.7%), lichenoid contact reaction (14.0%), and
orofacial granulomatosis (10.7%). Dental personnel, representing
18 (14.9%) of the 121 patients, all suffered from hand dermatitis.
Intraorally, so-called lichenoid contact lesions (Figure 17-9) have
been associated with an allergic reaction to amalgam and dental
alloys. Also, other causes, such as mechanical irritation, have,
however, been considered as a cause for such contact lesions. The
generalized oral lichen planus is not associated with an allergy.
An allergic reaction only occurs after the patient has been sensitized during a first contact by developing antibodies or immune

A

Biocompatibility

B

• Figure 17-9 Bilateral localized lichenoid lesions that are associated with gold alloy crowns. A, Lichenoid mucositis lesion (white area) in tissue adjacent to a gold alloy crown. B, Lichenoid mucositis lesion in
vestibular tissue next to gold alloy crown on opposite side of the arch. Patch testing of the patient was not
performed. (Courtesy Dr. Donald Cohen.)

362

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

A

B

C

• Figure 17-10 Erythematous reaction sites. Patch testing was not performed to confirm a suspected
allergic response. A, Palatal area that was exposed to an acrylic palatal appliance. B, Acrylic appliance
with embedded wire. C, Initial healing of palatal tissue shown in (A) within 2 to 3 days after removal of the
palatal appliance. (Courtesy Dr. Byung-Gook Kim.)

• Figure 17-11 Inflammation adjacent to the metal margin of a metal-ceramic crown. A potential allergy to one of the metal components should be
explored by a patch test. Furthermore, gingival reactions to metal oxides
that were produced during the firing process for metal-ceramic crowns
have also been proposed. (Courtesy Dr. Hyun-Ju Chung.)

process (Figure 17-11). In those cases, the prostheses are adjusted
or remade to eliminate the inflammation.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the task of the clinician when an allergy is suspected?

Patch Test
A patch test is only indicated for patients who exhibit clinical
symptoms suspected to be a type IV allergy. Because this type of
allergy is most prominent for dental materials, the patch test is
mainly performed to verify the allergenic nature of the clinical
symptoms. A series of substances, which are suspected to cause the
allergy, is placed on the back of the patient in tiny reservoirs and
covered by a patch. Figure 17-12 illustrates positive responses of
dental alloys on a patient’s back. Patch testing in general has been
validated for epidermal exposure, which may also induce sensitization of naive T lymphocytes and is relevant primarily for detecting dermal effects of hypersensitivity (contact dermatitis). In vitro
testing, for example, with the lymphocyte transformation test
(LTT), has been proposed but so far has not found general acceptance by relevant scientific organizations (e.g., American Academy
of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology [AAAI]; see https://www
.aaaai.org/ask-the-expert/lymphocyte).

• Figure 17-12 Positive responses to patch tests on a patient’s back.
(Courtesy Dr. Young Ho Won.)

All testing for verifying allergies has to be performed by an
allergologist, and the referring dentist must provide a list of suspected substances. Tests may be performed with samples of the
suspected material (e.g., the alloy) or with the components, such
as the cations from metals that are components of the alloy. The
use of metal cations and monomers is generally more sensitive
than using material samples and is the standard procedure. Therefore information on the composition of the used materials is
essential (see the Safety Data Sheets section later in the chapter).

Immunotoxicity
The principal concept of immunotoxicity is that substances can
alter the immune system. These cellular alterations can occur
because of the direct toxic effect of a leached substance. Monocytes/macrophages control chronic inflammatory and immune
responses, and they also secrete many substances, such as signaling
molecules, that alter the actions of other cells. Thus, if substances
leached from a biomaterial reduce the monocyte’s ability to secrete
these substances, this may impair the immune system.
Released substances from dental materials, such as metal ions
or monomers, can also alter the immune system at subtoxic concentrations. As shown in Figure 17-13, mercury ions increase the
glutathione (GSH) content of human monocytes in cell culture,
whereas palladium ions decrease the cells’ GSH content. GSH

CHAPTER 17

363

250
TNF-alpha secretion (pg/mL)

6

5
Hg2+

Glutathione/cell (pg)

Biocompatibility

4

3

+LPS

200

150

100

50
–LPS

2
0

Control

Pd2+

1

1000

4000

Concentration of HEMA (µM)

• Figure 17-14 Reduction in secretion of tumor necrosis factor alpha
0
0.1

1
10
100
Metal ion concentration (µM)

1000

• Figure 17-13 Response of monocytes in a cell culture after a 24-hour
exposure to mercury ions (Hg2+) or palladium ions (Pd2+). Mercury ions
produced a spike in glutathione at an ion concentration of about 8 μmol/L
and a subsequent decrease as mercury became toxic to the cells. In contrast, during exposure to palladium ions, the glutathione content did not
decrease significantly until the palladium ion concentration increased to
between 200 and 300 μmol/L, which is far below the ion concentrations
required to induce toxicity in these cells. Because both types of metal ions
alter the chemical defense (glutathione production) against oxidative stress
at subtoxic ion levels, these metals are believed to affect the immune system. (Courtesy Dr. John Wataha.)

is a tripeptide and is necessary for maintaining the redox balance in cells because GSH compensates for the constantly and
physiologically generated reactive oxygen species (ROS). GSH
is also responsible for the detoxification of foreign substances
entering the cell. However, if the concentration of the foreign
substance is increasing, the cellular GSH is depleted (as a result
of the detoxification), and the redox balance is impaired. The
consequence is cellular stress as a result of the increased ROS concentration. Thus, necessary cell functions in the immune system
are impaired.
A further effect on the immune system is a result of the influence of substances from dental materials on the cellular bacterial
defense system. Bacterial surface antigens, such as lipopolysaccharides (LPSs) from gram-negative bacteria or lipoteichoic acid from
gram-positive bacteria, are recognized by the immune cell surface
receptors of human macrophages, which then, through intracellular signal transduction, results in the release of interleukin-1 (IL-1)
or interleukin-6 (IL-6) or tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α).
These substances are secreted to induce inflammation, with the
aim of eliminating the invading bacteria (bacterial clearance).
Figure 17-14 shows a graph of the amount of TNF-α secreted
by monocytes after LPS stimulation (control) and after additional exposure to HEMA in different concentrations. Exposure
to HEMA clearly reduced the TNF-α secretion and therefore
impaired bacterial clearance. The significance of this effect is that
the relatively small amounts of HEMA released from, for example,
dental adhesives can alter the normal functions of immune cells,

(TNF-α) by monocytes after exposure to different concentrations of hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA). The TNF-α secretion shown on the yaxis is plotted against the HEMA concentration on the x-axis for cells that
were either stimulated by lipopolysaccharide (+LPS) or not stimulated by
lipopolysaccharide (−LPS). HEMA reduces the immune response toward
LPS/bacteria. (Courtesy Dr. John Wataha.)

thereby contributing to the potential immunotoxicity of some
dental materials.

Effect on the Environment
Dental practice generates not only sharps and infectious waste
but also chemical waste. In many countries the disposal of special chemical waste is regulated by laws. For example, any residues
from placing amalgam fillings, such as scraps or used amalgam
capsules, have to be disposed of properly. Of special importance
are amalgam particles produced during the removal of amalgam
restorations. So-called amalgam separators have been developed in
order to remove—according to ISO 11143—at least 95% of these
particles from the effluent water of dental practices. Within the
Minamata Convention of 2013, aimed at reducing the discharge
of mercury into the environment worldwide, the installation of
such amalgam separators has been mentioned as one provision to
reduce the mercury discharge from dental practices. Such particles
are also generated during the removal of other restorative materials, such as resin composites.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
What are the obligations of the clinician to prevent occupational hazards for
the practice team?

Occupational Hazards for Dental Personnel
Dental technicians are exposed to significantly more metallic elements and monomers than the general population. Inhalation and
aspiration of various dust and toxic vapors, which are generated
during the heating, melting, and finishing of certain alloys and
the processing of resin materials, may irritate the respiratory and
gastrointestinal systems of these technicians and may cause toxic
or allergic reactions.

364

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Pneumoconiosis is a severe fibrotic lung disease that can be
caused by chronic exposure to inorganic dust. A 1993 epidemiological study reported a prevalence of this lung disease in
approximately 15% of dental technicians after 20 years or more
of exposure. The prevalence in the general population is less than
1%. Pneumoconiosis is caused by dust that is generated during
the finishing of base-metal frameworks and comprises silica and
silicon carbide from abrasives (Chapter 16, Biological Hazards of
Abrasive Procedures); asbestos; or alloys such as Co-Cr, Co-CrMo, and Ni-Cr-Be. Silicosis is the most common occupational
disease among dental technicians. According to the World Health
Organization (WHO) International Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC), beryllium and beryllium compounds are carcinogenic to humans. The incidence of pneumoconiosis increases
significantly among dental technicians working in laboratories
with insufficient dust-handling facilities. However, such lung diseases may occur only if currently recognized safety precautions
(see following discussion) are not followed. Furthermore, there is
no evidence to suggest that metallic dental restorations increase
carcinogenic risks in patients.
Dental technicians also report more allergic contact dermatitis
than the general population because they have frequent contact
with alloys or methacrylate-based monomers, such as methylmethactylate (MMA). However, data on the frequency of such
reactions among dental technicians vary from slight to major risks.
Improved safety measures in dental laboratories have reduced the
frequency of contact dermatitis from allergen exposure, although
wearing gloves may increase the allergic reaction to latex. The
most frequent allergens are different acrylates, followed by metals
like palladium and nickel.
Adverse occupational reactions are common for dental office
personnel exhibiting various forms of hand or facial contact
dermatitis, as well as respiratory disease. Contact-type reactions
occurred most often because of exposure to acrylates, formaldehyde, fragrances, latex, and rubber additives. Allergic reactions
to latex gloves are well recognized for dental office staff. Metallic
dental materials do not seem to be a major occupational hazard
for dental personnel. The special problems related to mercury handling are described later in the chapter (Dental Amalgam section).
Also, allergic respiratory problems such as asthma, rhinitis,
and laryngitis have been reported for dental personnel, especially
by dental auxiliary personnel. The reason is exposure to different
acrylates, usually those contained in dental adhesives. If a type I
reaction is suspected, a prick test (pricking the skin on the inner
side of the forearm with a needle or pin containing a small amount
of the allergen) can be performed.
Since the last century, dentists have worn gloves when treating patients, mainly to reduce the risk of microbial transmission.
However, wearing gloves does not protect against the exposure of
the skin to substances like monomers. Therefore a so-called “notouch-technique” is recommended to avoid contact of uncured
materials with both protected and unprotected skin.

Biocompatibility Testing
Biological testing of materials has evolved significantly since the
1950s and 1960s. Comparability of test results between laboratories was soon recognized to be possible only if test methods
were standardized. In 1980 the Fédération Internationale Dentaire (FDI) published its “Recommended Standard Practices for
Biological Evaluation of Dental Materials.” In the same year,
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/American Dental

Association (ADA) Specification No. 41, under the same title,
became effective. Both documents were a collection of generally
accepted standardized test methods and represented great progress
toward the establishment of biological test programs for dental
materials. The FDI recommendation has led to the publication
of ISO 7405:1997, Preclinical Evaluation of Biocompatibility
of Medical Devices Used in Dentistry—Test Methods for Dental Materials. This ISO standard was revised in 2008 and 2018.
Meanwhile, ANSI/ADA No. 41 was also revised extensively and is
now largely identical to ISO 7405:2018.

Purpose of Biocompatibility Testing
The primary purpose of biocompatibility testing is to protect
dental patients, dental personnel, and the environment. Before
the actual testing, there is a clinical risk assessment for the new
material that needs to be completed. This risk assessment must
take into consideration the intended function of the material in
the mouth, the physical and chemical characteristics, the material’s release of substances, location, and the time of exposure. The
outcome of the clinical risk assessment determines the tests to be
performed.
The law requires that the manufacturer provides a clinical
risk assessment together with necessary tests as a prerequisite for
market access of new materials and for newly emerging risks for
materials that are already on the market (see Legal Requirements
section). The clinician should be familiar with the basic concepts
of biocompatibility testing in order to be able to critically evaluate the claims of the manufacturers. As such, the discussion of the
evaluation of biological effects of dental materials is based on the
principles of (1) the release of substances to reach these sites, (2)
their intrinsic (i.e., molecular) toxicity, (3) their concentrations,
and (4) the exposure times, which may range from seconds to
years. Finally, the relevant tests have to be performed and the risks
fully evaluated.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can a material exhibiting no obvious biological effects by itself alter body
functions?

Release of Substances From Materials
Each biomaterial can degrade and release components under certain environmental and physical conditions. The environment–
material interface is an active site for the corrosion of alloys that
alters the material’s surface structure and releases metallic ions to
the body. A decline in pH may also occur at the biofilm–material
interface after intake of cariogenic food and may increase the corrosion of certain dental alloys and the release of substances from
glass-ionomer cements (GICs). A change in the environment
caused by acidic substances such as citrus juices or regurgitated
hydrochloric acid can alter the surfaces of ceramics. On the other
hand, high-pH environments may also increase the dissolution of
some materials, such as glass-phase ceramics. Another factor that
increases the potential for the release of substances is the surface
roughness of a restoration or prosthesis. Rough surfaces promote
the corrosion of alloys and the liberation of monomers and catalysts from resin materials.
Unfinished surfaces of resin composites and pit-and-fissure sealants have an oxygen-inhibited outer layer that may be more susceptible to leaching monomers or impurities such as bisphenol A.

CHAPTER 17

Also, unpolymerized monomers or other unreacted components
of set resin composites can be liberated over time. For resin-based
composites, the lipophilicity of the environment is important,
and more substances are eluted, for example, in ethanol compared
with water. The release of substances generally declines after setting, as was shown for resin composites. However, substances are
also released over an extended period of time.

Biocompatibility

claim that allergic reactions are dose independent. However, clinical experience shows that patients with proven contact dermatitis to nickel ions may, in certain cases, tolerate nickel-containing
alloys in the mouth. One explanation is the extremely low concentration of Ni caused by the diluting effect of saliva.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why does test exposure time matter in conducting biocompatibility tests?

Dose–Response Relationship of Toxicity
Paracelsus (1493−1541), who is sometimes referred to as the
“father of toxicology,” stated, “All things are poison, and nothing is without poison; only the dose permits something not to be
poisonous.” In short, “The dose makes the poison.” The statement
indicates that toxicity is dose dependent; the effect of a specific
dose of a therapeutic substance may be toxic, nontoxic, or beneficial. The quantity of a substance (in milligrams) ingested by test
animals is often expressed as milligrams per kilograms of body
weight (mg/kg bw).
Figure 17-15 shows a typical dose–response curve from a cellculture test (cytotoxicity test), where cell viability, measured as
relative optical density, decreases with an increase in the dose of the
applied chemical (e.g., ZnCl2). Two important concepts evolved
from the dose–response plot. A dose can be described either as a
lethal dose (LD), in which the response is the death of animals or
cells, or an effective dose (ED), in which the response is another
observable outcome. The plot allows us to identify the doses that
affect a percentage of the exposed population. For example, lethal
dose fifty (LD50) is the dose that kills 50% of the test organisms.
The plot also shows that there are doses of a substance that do
not elicit any adverse biological reaction, called the threshold dosage, and the highest nontoxic dose is the so-called no-observedadverse-effect level (NOAEL).
Not all biological reactions to dental materials follow this strict
dose concept. As has been mentioned, allergic reactions can occur
at much lower concentrations than toxic reactions, and they are
rather insensitive to the concentration of allergen. Some even

Test Requirements
The test conditions and the interpretation of the test results
should reflect the nature of body contact and the duration of
that contact (ISO 10993-1). The nature of contact can be a
surface contact, an externally communicating medical device,
or implanted medical devices. Materials may contact an intact
or a breached surface. For instance, removable dentures contact
the mucosal membrane, which mainly is intact, but periodontal
dressings contact breached mucosal surfaces. Dental restorative
materials generally belong to the group of externally communicating devices. This classification obviously reflects the presence
or the lack of a barrier, such as the epithelium or the dentin,
between the material and the target tissue. No such barrier is
present for dental implants.
The duration of contact is grouped into (1) limited (≤24 hours),
(2) prolonged (>24 hours to 30 days), and (3) long term (>30
days) contact (ISO 10993-1). For example, impression materials
are used only for a few minutes, and temporary cements are in
the mouth for up to a few weeks. For short-term exposures, the
risk for allergic reactions is of special concern but not the risks of
chronic toxic or mutagenic effects. In general, the most demanding tests are designed to evaluate materials that are expected to last
for the longest times.
All available biocompatibility tests are so-called “models,”
always representing one specific aspect of biocompatibility, and
as such, a model may not meet all the requirements mentioned

Relative optical density (%)

150

100

50

0
NOAEL

–50
1E-2

1E-1

365

1E0

1E+1

1E+2

LD50

1E+3

1E+4

1E+5

Concentration of ZnCl2 (M)

• Figure 17-15 Typical dose–response curve indicating the biological reaction (cell metabolism, measured
as relative optical density) in relation to the applied dose of Zn2+. Single measurements are shown (in circle)
in combination with a best-fit curve (solid) and 95% confidence interval (dotted lines). The lethal dose fifty
(LD50) is the concentration of Zn2+ that affects 50% of the culture; the no-observed-adverse-effect level
(NOAEL) is the highest concentration that has no effect.

366

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

previously. Therefore a set of tests is necessary for a final evaluation
of the biocompatibility.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Is there one best test to measure biocompatibility?

Types of Biocompatibility Tests
Three types of tests are used to analyze the biocompatibility of
dental materials: (1) in vitro tests, (2) animal tests, and (3) usage
tests performed in experimental animals or humans. Tests can be
performed either with the material or with an extract. Extracts are
prepared by placing a test material with a defined surface into a
liquid (e.g., saline or cell-culture medium) of a given volume for a
defined period of time. The terms eluate and extract are often used
synonymously in the literature.

In Vitro Tests
For in vitro tests, the candidate material or an extract of the material is placed in direct or indirect contact with some biological system outside of an organism in a container (e.g., cell-culture dishes
or test tubes). Indirect contact involves a barrier such as agar, a
membrane filter, or dentin between the test material and the target biological system. The goal of indirect contact is to improve
the relevance of cell-culture tests for certain clinical situations.
For example, a dentin–disk barrier mimics the tooth cavity in a
cell-culture system. Biological systems may consist of mammalian cells, cellular organelles, tissues, bacteria, or certain enzymes.
The main endpoints to be recorded are cytotoxicity, genotoxicity,
and mutagenicity. In vitro tests are relatively fast and inexpensive.
They can easily be standardized and controlled to provide highly
reliable and reproducible measurements.
The in vitro tests, however, lack the ability to closely simulate
the complex interactions that exist in an organism between and
among the immune, inflammatory, and circulatory systems. The
poor correlation between cytotoxicity assays and pulp reactions
for some restorative materials in animal models has been reported.
In conclusion, in vitro tests can be used to check if a substance
eluted from the test material has the general potential to be harmful to cells. In vitro tests for assessing genotoxicity or mutagenicity
are often used to assess the carcinogenic potential of a new material in order to avoid complex and expensive animal experiments.
Animal Tests
Animal tests differ from in vitro tests in that an intact animal
(e.g., cats, ferrets, guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, and rats) is used
rather than cells or tissues of animal or human origin. In some animal tests, the test materials are not applied as intended in dental
patients (e.g., restorative materials are implanted subcutaneously
in rats for evaluation of nonspecific toxic response). For acute or
chronic toxicity tests to determine LD50 values, test materials are
ground and fed to animals. Because oral ingestion in such quantities is not realistic, the relevance of such tests for dental materials is
questioned. Many other animal models are described in the literature for testing certain material properties (e.g., carcinogenicity),
but they are rarely used for testing dental materials, and respective
in vitro methods are used instead.
The advantage of animal tests lies in their ability to permit
intact biological systems to respond to or interact with a candidate
material. The disadvantages of animal tests are their high costs, the
difficulty in controlling confounding factors, and the length of

time that may be required to obtain a measurable response. Also,
animal rights activists and other individuals criticize these tests
because of ethical concerns regarding the use of animals. Finally,
the relevance of animal tests in simulating human responses is
often challenged. In spite of these disadvantages, animal tests are
still relevant for evaluating certain risks of new materials prior
to their clinical use, such as testing the sensitization potential in
guinea pigs.

Usage Test
In this group of tests, materials are applied in the test animal as
they are in the patient (e.g., a class V cavity is prepared in monkey
teeth and filled with the test material). After up to 3 months, the
pulp reaction is evaluated histologically. Such usage tests can also
be performed in humans (e.g., in teeth scheduled for extraction
for orthodontic reasons). The choice of animals for a usage test
usually involves larger animals with an anatomy similar to that of
humans, such as dogs, monkeys, or sheep. The ultimate relevance
of a usage test depends on the extent to which the test simulates
the clinical use of the product.
Human clinical trials may be regarded as the best-known usage
test, but there are limitations. Very often no histology is performed, and from clinical symptoms alone, no evaluation of the
real damage to the pulp after placement of a restorative material
is possible. Furthermore, teeth scheduled for extraction because of
orthodontic reasons are normally obtained from young patients.
These teeth have rather open apices, which may react differently
from the teeth of older patients, which have narrow apical openings and may potentially have previous pulp damage from caries.
Usage tests involving either animals or human subjects have
several disadvantages, including their design complexity, the difficulty in controlling experimental variables, and interpretation
challenges. If humans are used in a clinical trial, approval for the
proposed usage tests must be obtained from an institutional review
board. Such tests usually take a long time, which adds considerably to the typically high cost of using human subjects. Finally,
human usage tests may involve legal and confidentiality issues that
do not occur for animal and in vitro tests.
All test methods just mentioned have advantages and limitations. As cell-culture techniques evolve, animal-based tests are
continuously being replaced by in vitro tests, along with imaging
techniques and research focused on mechanisms that control the
biological responses to materials. Biocompatibility testing in the
future may lead to more reliable predictions of adverse effects, and
this knowledge of biological properties may allow us to formulate materials that provide specific, desired biological responses.
However, one should keep in mind that to date, no test can guarantee that a substance will not cause an adverse effect in individuals exposed to that material in the clinic. Therefore postmarket
surveillance is of utmost importance (see Legal Regulations and
Risk Classes section).
Test Strategy
All test methods discussed previously have obvious pros and cons,
and thus following certain test strategies is advisable. In vitro tests
should initially be performed for cytotoxicity or genotoxicity/mutagenicity evaluation. Assessment is then made if the results from in
vitro tests together with what is known from the literature are sufficient to fulfill the biocompatibility criteria. If not, animal tests such
as allergy tests using guinea pigs are performed. Afterward, a new
assessment is made to determine whether further testing is necessary. The strategy is shown in Figure 17-16. Clinical tests in some

CHAPTER 17

Acceptable risks

Reassessment

Clinical tests

Reassessment

In vivo tests (animal experiments)

Reassessment

In vitro tests (cell cultures)

Risk assessment by an expert

• Figure 17-16 Strategy of biocompatibility testing. Based on a clinical
risk assessment if necessary, in vitro tests are performed. After reevaluation, it will be decided if an animal test is necessary. Then a further reevaluation follows, and so forth. (From Schmalz G, Arenholt-Bindslev D, editors:
Biocompatibility of Dental Materials. Berlin-Heidelberg, 2009, Springer.)

countries are mandatory for materials that are considered to be of
high risk. The final decision for market clearance is then made by
an interchange between manufacturers and a government agency
(e.g., the U.S. Food and Drug Administration [FDA] in the United
States) or a private organization with authority granted by a government agency.

CRITICAL QUESTION
If you were presented with a new material, never before used in a human
being, how would you decide if it was safe for use as a dental restorative
material?

Responsibilities
The manufacturer is responsible and liable for a new material to
meet all requirements regarding biocompatibility (see Legal Regulations and Risk Classes section). When such products are released to
the profession, dentists, dental staff, and patients must assume that
sufficient safety testing has been performed to minimize potential
risks. The question is, how much evidence is sufficient to demonstrate that a product is sufficiently safe for general clinical use? The
consensus of several parties (i.e., manufacturers and government
agencies) is a prerequisite, as discussed later in this chapter. In addition, the clinician also has certain responsibilities in this respect.
First of all, the clinician must strictly follow the instructions
for use with the correct material indications. If the clinician does

Biocompatibility

367

not follow the indication, the manufacturer is no longer liable.
Furthermore, the clinician must apply state-of-the-art techniques;
for instance, insufficient curing of resin materials results in increased
cytotoxicity of the material and impaired mechanical properties.
New risks may arise with materials already on the market (e.g.,
estrogenicity associated with sealants), and the clinician must be
able to critically assess the information provided by the manufacturer or in the scientific literature. The information on biocompatibility provided by the manufacturer may be insufficient because
the detailed composition of the materials is often not declared. If
a patient is allergic to certain monomers or metals, the clinician
needs to know the composition of the material to be used to avoid
an adverse effect. If in doubt, the clinician can contact the company directly to obtain this information.
Manufacturers often make special claims regarding their materials, such as bioactivity. The clinician must be very critical of such
claims, which should only be generated on the basis of neutral
information and basic knowledge. More importantly, one can
search for the most current evidence in the PubMed, Web of Science, or other databases with key words or MeSH terms.
A request should be made to national agencies in the dentist’s
home country to determine whether any adverse-event reports
have been made. As one might expect, unless catastrophic failures
have occurred soon after the product’s introduction, the shorter
the time that the product has been in existence, the smaller the
number of adverse-effects reports that will be found. Furthermore, legal regulations may require that dentists report adverse
reactions they observed with their patients (see Postmarket
Surveillance section).
Finally, the clinician should be well informed about the biocompatibility of dental materials to answer the queries of patients.
Biocompatibility is a current topic for the media, and there is lots
of information available on the Internet, some of which is not
based on scientific evidence. The clinician must be able to provide
correct answers to the patient.

Biocompatibility Testing Standards
Because of the multifactorial nature of biocompatibility and the
large number of different test methods described in the literature,
standardization is essential for the unbiased comparison of results
from different studies, and standards are helpful to fulfill the
legal requirements for biocompatibility. The two ISO standards
relevant to the biocompatibility of devices and materials in dentistry are ISO 10993, Biological Evaluation of Medical Devices;
and ISO 7405:2018, Evaluation of Biocompatibility of Medical
Devices Used in Dentistry.
ISO 10993 consists of more than 20 single standards and
related documents, each addressing a different area of biological testing of medical devices (which includes dental materials). For example, Part 1 describes the general requirements for
biocompatibility testing; Part 3 describes tests for genotoxicity,
carcinogenicity, and reproductive toxicity; Part 5 describes different tests for cytotoxicity; and Part 10 describes tests for irritation and skin sensitization. ISO 7405:2018 describes the tests
that are specific to dental materials. For example, the standard
describes dentistry-specific cytotoxicity tests and all usage tests,
such as the pulp/dentin test, the pulp capping test, the endodontic usage test, and the implant usage test, as well as the dentin–
disk barrier test in a cell-culture system described earlier. Clinical
risk assessment (see Figure 17-16) can be performed as recommended in ISO 14971:2019, Medical Devices—Application of

368

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Risk Management to Medical Devices, where the different steps
for selecting the appropriate tests are delineated.
Standards are regularly reviewed and revised. However, standards also have some disadvantages. Standards may not always
keep pace with the development of new scientific technology. In
addition, standards are developed based on agreements and compromises among manufacturers, academicians, and the dental
profession, which is a time-consuming process. Standards may be
considered arbitrary in nature because certain tests are selected
out of a larger number of methods. However, in spite of these
limitations, standards for biological testing are necessary to ensure
the biological safety of medical and dental products, and they are
generally considered to represent the state of the art in biocompatibility testing.

Safety Data Sheets
Each dental product is supplied with a Safety Data Sheet (SDS),
also known as a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) before 2013
or a product safety data sheet (PSDS). In the United Kingdom, the
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) requires
such information. This is a standardized report on the properties of
a particular product/substance, for example, melting point, boiling
point, and flash point. This report is intended for occupational settings and is essential for users and emergency personnel because this
data sheet describes procedures for handling or working with the
material safely. In addition to physical data, this document identifies
toxicity risks, health effects, first-aid procedures, reactivity, storage
and disposal conditions, and where applicable, procedures for firefighting. Furthermore, SDSs contain information on the types of
protective equipment that should be used and procedures that must
be followed for accidental releases and handling of spills. Limited
information on the composition of the material is also included.

Labeling
Labeling requirements are based on national or international legislation. Besides other obligations, potentially harmful substances
must be properly labeled to minimize the risk of injuries to anyone
who may come in contact with them and the risks of environmental exposure. The United Nations has installed a Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labeling of Chemicals (GHS),
which provides a harmonized basis for labeling. Special pictograms may be placed on the package in addition to so-called Hand P-statements. H-statements are a set of standardized phrases
about the hazards of chemical substances. P-statements are a set
of precautionary statements. Examples of the GHS pictograms are
shown in Figure 17-17.

Legal Regulations and Risk Classes
The Dental Products Panel (DPP) of the FDA Medical Devices
Advisory Committee reviews and evaluates data concerning the
safety and effectiveness of marketed and investigational products
for use in dentistry, endodontics, or bone physiology relative to
the oral and maxillofacial area and makes appropriate recommendations to the Commissioner of Food and Drugs.

Risk Classes
The FDA classifies all medical devices into one of three classes—
Class I, II, or III—according to the risk-based regulatory

controls necessary to provide a reasonable assurance of the safety
and effectiveness of a device. Class I devices generally pose the
lowest risk to the patient/user, and Class III devices pose the
highest risk. Dental devices that are not specifically exempted are
required to be cleared by FDA prior to distribution into interstate commerce.
There are three levels of regulatory controls: general controls,
special controls, and premarket approval (PMA). General controls have the least amount of regulatory control and are used
whenever the level of device risk is low. They apply to all three
classes of devices and include adulteration or misbranding,
device electronic establishment registration and listing, premarket notification, quality systems, medical device reporting,
and labeling. Special controls apply when general controls alone
are insufficient to ensure safety and effectiveness. They apply
to Class II devices and include device guidelines and manuals,
adhering to mandatory performance standards, recommendations or other actions, and special labeling. PMA is necessary
whenever general or special controls cannot provide sufficient
information to ensure medical device safety and effectiveness.
They apply to Class III devices and include clinical investigations, safety and effectiveness data, adverse reactions and complications, patient information, and many more according to
the type of device.
If the manufacturers intend to introduce a device to the U.S.
market that does not require the standard PMA (e.g., Class II
devices), they need to submit a 510(k). The 510(k) is a premarket
submission to FDA to demonstrate that the device is at least as
safe and effective as, that is, substantially equivalent to, a legally
marketed device that is not subject to PMA. Most of the submissions to the Dental Branch are 510(k) types of submissions.
Similar regulatory systems have been established in other parts of
the world. For example, the EU system also uses risk Classes I, II, and
III but subdivides Class II into IIa and IIb. Dental devices are mainly
in Class I or IIa; dental implants are in Class IIb. Class II devices
require the involvement of a “notified body,” and Class III require a
device examination by a “notified body” (comparable to the PMA).

Postmarket Surveillance
Even if all available test methods and required evidence are used
and exercised with due diligence, an adverse reaction may still
occur when a large population is exposed to a new material.
Therefore clinicians are required (in some countries by law) to
report observed adverse reactions to competent authorities. The
FDA receives adverse-event reports on devices as either individual
reports or summary reports. Individual reports include voluntary
reports submitted by health care providers and consumers through
MedWatch (http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/default.htm),
the safety information and adverse-event reporting program of
the FDA. Manufacturers and user facilities submit mandatory
reports.

Side Effect of Various Material Groups
To assess the biocompatibility of a material, it is necessary to know
the composition, the substances released, and the chemical/physical characteristics of both the material and the substances released.
Biocompatibility cannot be predicted by the composition alone.
The material groups of interest include dental amalgam, methacrylate-based resins, dental alloys, dental ceramics, hydrofluoric
acid, GICs, and latex products.

CHAPTER 17

PICTOGRAM

MEANING OF PICTOGRAM

Acute Toxic

TYPE OF HAZARD(S)
(Associated with this pictogram)

The chemical is a risk to
health if used improperly.

• Carcinogen
• Mutagenicity
• Reproductive Toxicity
• Respiratory Sensitizer
• Target Organ Toxicity
• Aspiration Toxicity

The chemical is a serious
health or physical hazard
or poison. It will produce
adverse effects following a
single dose. This pictogram
is usually used in combination
with the Health Hazard Pictogram.

• Acute Toxicity (fatal or
toxic) if inhaled or
swallowed, or if it comes
in contact with the skin.

The chemical may cause
immediate, serious health
effects but it is less severe than
the Severe Toxic pictogram (skull
and crossbones). This pictogram
is usually used in combination with
the Health Hazard Pictogram.

• Irritant (skin and eye)
• Skin Sensitizer
• Acute Toxicity
• Narcotic Effects
• Respiratory Tract Irritant

The chemical may burst into
flame. Be careful to keep away
from ignition sources and
combustible materials.

• Flammables
• Pyrophorics
• Self-Heating
• Emits Flammable Gas
• Self-Reactive
• Organic Peroxides

The chemical is a physical or
health hazard that can easily
damage skin or eyes. Be aware
of PPE and storage requirements.

• Skin Corrosion/Burns
• Eye Damage
• Corrosive to Metals

The chemical may cause other
materials to ignite or burn faster.
It can create an increased fire
risk in work or storage environment.

• Oxidizers

Health Hazard

Severe Toxic

Biocompatibility

Flammable

Corrosive

Oxidizer

Gas Under Pressure

Explosive

This chemical consists of
pressurized gas that would
explode, rocket, or damage
health if heated, ruptured,
or leaking.

• Gases Under Pressure

This material can blow up
or otherwise create an
uncontrolled reaction.
Should be treated with
extreme caution.

• Explosives
• Self-Reactives
• Organic Peroxides

• Figure 17-17 Examples for labeling according to the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and
Labeling of Chemicals (GHS) system. This labeling system, developed for chemicals, is often used for
labeling dental materials.

369

370

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

CRITICAL QUESTION
What evidence or documentation can you provide to dental patients to assure
them that amalgam is a safe material for dental restorations for the general
population?

Dental Amalgam
Although amalgam is an alloy of metals such as Ag, Sn, Cu, or Zn
with Hg, most of the controversy stems from the known toxicity
of mercury and the question of the toxic effects of mercury within
amalgam restorations.

Mercury
Mercury occurs naturally and exists in the environment in three
forms: metallic mercury (Hg⁰), inorganic salts (HgS and HgCl2),
and organic mercury (CH3Hg and C2H5Hg). Microorganisms
and various natural processes can convert metallic mercury to
inorganic compounds, inorganic mercury to organic compounds,
or organic mercury to inorganic compounds. Methylmercury is
the most common organic form that is transformed by natural
processes in the environment and is more toxic than ethyl mercury, metallic mercury, or the inorganic salts. Methylmercury is a
major safety concern because it bioaccumulates through the food
chain, mainly in large fishes such as sharks, swordfish, and tuna,
and enters the human body through fish consumption. Metallic mercury accumulates in the kidneys and the brain. In the
brain, metallic mercury can be converted to inorganic salt with
an increased retention time. The half-life ranges from 13 to 99
days depending on the form, with metallic mercury exhibiting a
longer half-life than inorganic forms. Evidence from primate studies, human case studies, modeling studies, or experimental studies
shows a large variation of data, but the half-life of inorganic mercury in the brain may be years or decades.
Metallic mercury gains access to the body via the skin or as
a vapor inhaled through the lungs. Ingested metallic mercury is
poorly absorbed from the gut (0.01%), which makes inhalation
of mercury vapor the primary portal into the body. Absorption
of ingested inorganic mercury in the gut is 1% to 7%. Excretion may occur through exhaled vapor or through urine, feces,
or skin (sweat). For example, mercury vapor is readily absorbed
after inhalation. Dissolved mercury can be transported through
blood and distributed to the brain and other organs and excreted
by exhalation and in urine. Metallic mercury is transported to
blood cells and tissues, where metallic mercury is oxidized rapidly
to mercuric ions (Hg2+).
Numerous tests for the body burden of mercury have been
developed, including those based on the analysis of blood, urine,
and hair. Of these test parameters, the measurement of mercury
in the urine after 24 hours may be the best long-term indicator
of the total metallic mercury body burden (expressed as μg/L)
or normalized to grams of creatinine in urine (expressed as μg/g
creatinine). Normal levels of creatinine in urine are between
0.6 and 1.1 mg/dL (females) and 0.7 and 1.3 mg/dL (males).
Sampling of metals in hair, nails, feces, bone, and teeth is also
advocated in certain cases as a partial indication of long-term
exposure.
Symptoms of Mercury Poisoning
The nervous system is sensitive to all forms of mercury, although
the brain is most sensitive to metallic mercury and methylmercury. Acute symptoms of mercury poisoning are mainly a result of

spillage of liquid mercury in confined industrial spaces. The first
sign is dyspnea. This may be followed by paroxysmal cough, chest
pain, pulmonary infiltration, chills, nausea, and vomiting. Fatal
outcomes have also occurred.
Chronic exposure levels indicated by a mercury concentration
in urine of 5 μg/g creatinine (or 7 μg/L) are associated with no
risk; concentrations of >20 μg/g creatinine are associated with
increased risk of subtle or unclear symptoms; at 50 μg/g creatinine, subclinical adverse effects of kidney function may occur; and
the level of 100 μg/g creatinine is considered the onset of mercurialism. Symptoms of mercurialism include weakness, fatigue,
anorexia, weight loss, insomnia, irritability, changes in personality,
dizziness, tremors in the extremities or the eyelids, memory loss,
and impairment of vision and hearing. Although amalgams do
not release anywhere near toxic levels of mercury, the long half-life
of mercury in the body raises concerns among some individuals.

Mercury Release From Amalgam and Body Uptake
A low quantity of mercury is released from amalgam restorations
as a result of a passive tarnish layer on the surface. The total
mercury uptake from dental amalgams was estimated to be 1 to
3 μg/day, depending on the number and size of amalgam restorations present, although an uptake as high as 17 μg/day has been
reported. The WHO limit for the provisional tolerable weekly
intake (PTWI) value is 5 μg/kg bw or 50 μg/day for a 70-kg
person. The main source of mercury uptake from amalgam fillings is inhaled mercury vapor. Methylmercury is not released
from amalgams but is generally a product of bacteria or other
biological systems acting on metallic mercury, mainly in the
environment and taken up by humans through fish consumption. The conversion of inorganic mercury into methylmercury
inside the human body generally does not take place or only
in minor amounts. The total uptake of mercury from amalgam
fillings is reflected in an increased blood/urine level of mercury.
An increase of 1 to 1.8 μg/L of mercury in urine for each 10
restored amalgam surfaces is estimated, with more recent data
demonstrating lower values.
Levels of 1 to 5 μg/L in urine were described as the normal
range for nonoccupational groups. A 2013 study by Nicolae et
al. reported that 5418 Canadians, aged between 6 and 79 years,
with amalgam restorations of up to 65 surfaces per individual
showed that the mean urine mercury concentrations for 98% of
the group were below the levels associated with any health risks.
One study estimated the uptake of food-related organic mercury
to be approximately six times greater than the uptake of mercury
from amalgam restorations. A large survey of the U.S. population
published in 2016 confirmed that the inorganic mercury concentration in the blood increases with the number of amalgam
restoration surfaces. However, the level was well below the safety
threshold established by the WHO and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The mercury burden of dental personnel is usually higher than
for patients because of the application or removal of amalgam
fillings but has decreased in recent years, probably as a result of
improved handling techniques with amalgam, such as the use of
amalgam capsules.
Clinical Symptoms After Amalgam Application
Most claims for adverse reactions to amalgam have been related
to systemic effects. A main concern was directed toward the problem of neurological effects of mercury from amalgam fillings in
children.

CHAPTER 17

Systemic Reactions

Two extensive studies, the Casa Pia study of Portugal led by
Dr. Timothy DeRouen and the New England study of the United
States led by Dr. David Bellinger, were performed in parallel and
reported in 2006. Each study included more than 500 children
divided into two groups; one group received amalgam, and the
other group received resin composite fillings. After 5 years, the
level of mercury in urine in the children was larger with the amalgam group than that in the resin composite group in both studies.
However, no neurological effects could be observed with either
group in both studies. Later, the data/material of the studies was
used for further biochemical analyses or genetic testing, and new
groups of the children were formed. However, the results had been
inconsistent, and such “post hoc” analyses (regrouping of existing
data sets) are regarded as precarious because of possible bias.
The literature on the possible adverse effects of mercury from
amalgam is very extensive. The Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR), a scientific
commission of the EU, published a review in 2015 of recent existing literature, which concluded that the current evidence does not
preclude the use of amalgam for the general population. However, the choice of material should be based on the medical history of the patient, such as allergies or severe renal diseases, which
impair the renal excretion of mercury. In summary, there are no
data to show that mercury released from dental amalgam is harmful to the general population. The observation has been confirmed
by a 2020 literature survey from the International Association for
Dental Research (IADR) Science Information Committee.
Nevertheless, a small number of patients claim that their complaints/symptoms are derived from their amalgam fillings. Several
studies have investigated if claimed symptoms had disappeared after
the removal of amalgam. Nerdrum et al. (2004) could not find any
significant improvement of the symptoms after 7 years, but a questionnaire-based study by Kristoffersen et al. (2016) revealed some
improvement. Melchart et al. (2008) reported that implementing
a health-promotion program aimed at developing health-related
lifestyle management skills had a similar effect as amalgam removal
on the reduction of subjective complaints. The study also reported
a significant reduction of the inorganic mercury concentration in
the blood and urine for the amalgam-removal group.
Local Reactions

Lichenoid reactions have been associated with contact allergy to
mercury from amalgam restorations and possibly mechanical irritation by the restoration. Their appearance can be whitish plaque-like

Biocompatibility

371

or even with erosive parts. In the presence of such a reaction, the
amalgam restoration should be corrected to remove the mechanical irritant or replaced with a mercury-free material. A study of
patients with oral lichenoid contact reactions and positive patch-test
reactions to mercury compounds showed that partial or complete
replacement of amalgam fillings led to a significant improvement in
nearly all patients. In very rare cases, a carcinoma may develop following a localized lichenoid reaction. These patients should be monitored regularly and referred to a specialist if the reaction persists.
Amalgam debris can be trapped in the mucosal connective
tissue during placement or removal of amalgam restorations
through mucosal abrasions, lacerations, or compaction into the
gingival sulcus. Amalgam may enter the socket or periosteum
during tooth extraction or be left within the surgical site of an
endodontic retrofill procedure. Over time, the debris corrodes
and causes discoloration of the mucosa, known as an amalgam
tattoo (Figure 17-18). Implanted amalgam does not normally
cause acute tissue reactions and is normally totally asymptomatic.
Therefore these fragments of amalgam generally do not need to be
removed except for diagnostic reasons.
Allergic Reactions

Allergic reactions have been described, mainly related to mercury
but less to amalgam. If a patch test of mercury is positive, no new
amalgam restoration should be placed. Existing amalgam restorations should be replaced, if clinical symptoms are present.

FDA Recommendations
Recently, FDA has issued new recommendations for the use of dental amalgam (https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/dental-devices
/dental-amalgam-fillings). Briefly, FDA states that the majority of
evidence suggests exposure to mercury from dental amalgam does
not lead to negative health effects in the general population. Exposure to mercury may pose a greater health risk in certain groups of
people, who may be more susceptible to potential adverse effects
generally associated with mercury. These high-risk populations
include:
• Pregnant women and their developing fetuses
• Women who are planning to become pregnant
• Nursing women and their newborns and infants
• Children, especially those younger than six years of age
• People with pre-existing neurological disease
• People with impaired kidney function
• People with known heightened sensitivity (allergy) to mercury
or other components of dental amalgam

• Figure 17-18 Large blue-colored areas, typically referred to as an amalgam tattoo, which is a benign
area of discolored mucous membrane in the mouth. These examples are not associated with allergic reactions to mercury or any other metallic elements in the amalgam fillings. The discoloration is caused by
small amalgam granules that have fallen into open wounds created during the condensation and carving
of amalgam fillings in prepared teeth (A and B) or retrograde fillings in root apices (C). (Upper two photos,
Courtesy Dr. Hyun-Ju Chung.)

372

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

The FDA strongly encourages that alternative, non-mercury
materials such as resin composites or glass ionomer cements be
used when possible and appropriate. In addition, The FDA does
not recommend anyone remove or replace existing amalgam fillings in good condition unless it is considered medically necessary
by a health care professional.

Environment
In 2013, the Minamata Convention was signed and ratified
by more than 120 countries, where participating countries are
legally bound to reduce the mercury burden to the environment.
Although the relative contribution of dental amalgam to environmental mercury exposure compared with fossil fuel combustion
or small business gold mining is very low, a phase-down of dental
amalgam use was agreed upon. A number of provisions for such
a phase-down have been listed in the Minamata Convention of
2013; provisions include improved caries prevention, the use of
amalgam capsules, the installation of amalgam separators, and the
research/development of new alternative materials. The clinician
should check with the local authorities for the respective legal
regulations to follow with regard to amalgam waste disposal.
Handling of Mercury in the Dental Office
Because of the potential health risks for dental personnel exposed
to mercury from handling amalgam, special care must be exercised
when using dental amalgam. In 2003 the ADA issued detailed recommendations that ensure safe handling of amalgam and amalgam waste. For more details, see Chapter 8, Mercury Hygiene in
Dental Offices.

Methacrylates and Resin Composites
There is ample evidence that dental adhesives and resin materials
release free monomers into biological environments over extended
periods of time. Additionally, catalysts, accelerators, other additives, components within filler particles, and nanoparticles can
be liberated. The amount of released substances depends on the
degree of polymerization. Undercuring leads to an increased
amount of released substances and increased cytotoxicity. Monomers have been shown to evaporate during procedures in the dental offices or processing in the dental laboratory. The measured
monomer concentrations in the dental office are well below limit
values but greater in the dental laboratories despite mandatory
specific safety precautions. Although noticeable nanoparticles are
released during grinding, polishing, or restoration removal, the
amount of released particles is low, and no health risk for the dental personnel and the patient can be assumed. The main interest
of this section is directed to the monomers that include bis-GMA
and related molecules, urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA), TEGDMA, HEMA, or bisphenol A dimethacrylate (bis-DMA). Polyacid modified resin composites (“compomers”) have a similar
composition as resin composites, and they can be assumed to have
the same biological properties.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why can resin composites be used although bisphenol A is released?

Systemic Reactions
Presently, the most intensively discussed systemic effect of resin
materials is the (claimed) estrogenicity of bisphenol A (BPA) released
from dental resin materials. The evidence of BPA estrogenicity is

derived from molecular modeling studies and in vitro studies of
estrogen receptor–BPA binding. These studies also show that BPA
is probably 1000-fold less potent than the native estrogen hormone. Nonetheless, a number of diseases have been claimed to be
associated with BPA exposure from many environmental sources,
such as food can linings or polycarbonate plastics.
BPA is a precursor of bis-GMA, bis-DMA, and similar aromatic
monomers, which are used in resin composites. BPA can exist as
an impurity in both monomers. Bis-GMA under physiological
hydrolytic conditions does not degrade into BPA, but bis-DMA
does. BPA is released from resin composites made of bis-GMA
or related monomers over time as a result of the aforementioned
impurities and from bis-DMA materials, also as a result of degradation. However, the total release is very low and several orders of
magnitude below the presently accepted toxicological limit value
for systemic exposure of 4 μg/kg bw.
In vitro studies by Schweikl et al. (2006) showed that monomers such as HEMA or TEGDMA are genotoxic and mutagenic.
These effects could be related to an intracellular increase of ROS,
which occurred after GSH depletion resulting from monomer
detoxification. As a result of a functioning p-53 protein, DNA
damage was either repaired or the cells were transferred to apoptosis. Thus no tumor formation has been reported as a result of
resin composites.
As discussed before, nanoparticles are generated during grinding, polishing, or removal of resin composites restorations, but
the quantity is so small that no risk can be assumed for the dental
personnel and the patients. Nonetheless, the FDI issued recommendations in 2018 for dental personnel to further reduce the
risk. They should use ample water spray during procedures whenever possible, wear a surgical mask, and sculpt restorations to neardesired form before light curing, thus reducing dust generation.

Local Reactions
Pulp Reactions

Postoperative discomfort/sensitivity or pain shortly after the placement of resin composite restorations has often been attributed to
fluid movement in the dentinal tubules but not to toxicity, even
though resins before polymerization are known to be cytotoxic
in vitro and leachable components traverse dentin. However, no
toxic reaction of the dental pulp is observed histologically if the
remaining dentin thickness is well above 0.5 mm. For deep cavity
preparations, the observations are inconsistent, with some reporting no pulp reaction, mainly in animal experiments, and others
reporting such reactions.
In a direct pulp capping situation, pulpal inflammation with or
without a dentin bridge (reparative dentin) has been described in
patients. Interestingly, some studies using monkey models showed
that resin materials did not cause an inflammation, and dentin
bridging occurred. On the other hand, Bergenholtz, in 2000,
reported an association of pulpal inflammation under resin composite restorations with the presence of bacteria at the cavity floor.
The clinical consequences are that in flat or medium cavities, the
meticulous use of adhesive technique is most important in order
to avoid any bacteria at the cavity floor, and there is no risk of
chemical pulp damage by the resin materials. Incorporating an
antibacterial monomer in the adhesive resin has been reported.
However, in deep cavities with the potential for pulp exposure, a
base (e.g., a tricalcium silicate cement) should be applied at the
cavity floor close to the pulp.
The use of high-irradiance light-curing units (LCUs) may also
lead to pulp damage in deep cavities. LCUs with no more than

CHAPTER 17

2000 mW/cm² and exposure times of up to 20 sec are generally
used in dental practice. If LCUs with >2000 mW/cm² even with
shorter exposure times are recommended, the manufacturer must
provide sound scientific evidence of no tissue damage.
Gingival Reactions

Gingivitis close to resin-based composite fillings is mainly related
to the property of resin materials facilitating biofilm formation.
The acidic monomers in adhesives may cause a chemical burn on
the gingiva, which heals within a few days. Denture stomatitis
may appear as small reddish areas (Figure 17-10, A) on the mucosa
covered by an acrylic-based appliance. Undercuring results in an
increased release of cytotoxic monomers, with possible toxic effects
on the adjacent gingiva in deep approximal cavities. An LCU with
a very high irradiance may lead to local burns of the lips and the
tongue, and a rubber dam provides no protection.

Allergic Reactions
Nearly 2% of dental personnel have been described to be allergic to
resin-based adhesives/composites because of frequent exposure to
nonpolymerized materials. The allergenicity of methacrylate-based
materials such as HEMA or TEGDMA is well documented, and
the use of gloves is not effective in preventing contact because most
monomers diffuse easily through gloves, especially when diluted
with organic solvents, as in many dental adhesives. One study
showed that the best substance for screening allergies to methacrylate-based products is HEMA, which confirmed 96.7% of the dental patients with a suspected methacrylate allergy and 100% of the
dental personnel with clinical symptoms of a methacrylate allergy.
The allergic reactions occur primarily as contact dermatitis,
with the resins acting as haptens via delayed hypersensitivity (type
IV) mechanisms. In rare cases, anaphylactic responses have been
reported, with asthmatic symptoms, severe urticaria, and skin
rashes and swellings on the entire body, followed by the formation
of blisters on the child’s face, ears, and lips. In rare cases, allergic rhinitis or other reactions of the respiratory tract have been described.
Cross-reactivity between different monomers has been observed.

Dental Alloys
As discussed in Chapter 9, Alloy Classification by Principal Elements, dental alloys usually contain multiple elements and are
commonly described by their major components. The microstructure of alloys may be classified as single phase (solid solution) or
multiple phases depending on the difference in the atomic structure between elements (Chapter 2, Equilibrium-Phase Diagrams).
The composition and the phase structure significantly influence the
release of substances in the oral environment. This section will discuss the release mechanism and biological effects of alloys and the
allergy reactions of some common elements used in dental alloys.

Biocompatibility

373

Normally, dental alloys can release sufficient metal ions to cause
adverse effects in some cases but not enough to alter the esthetic
appearance or cause failure of the prostheses.
Several statements can be made about the release of elements
from dental casting alloys. First, multiphase structures often
increase the elemental release from alloys. Second, certain elements have an inherently higher tendency to be released from
dental alloys, regardless of alloy composition. In other words, the
release of metal ions from the alloys is not necessarily proportional
to the nominal alloy composition. Third, microscopic particles
can be abraded from metallic restorations during wear processes
that accelerate the corrosion processes in vivo because of the loss
of the passivation layer. Fourth, certain environmental conditions
around the alloy, such as a decline in pH under a biofilm, will
affect the release of elements. For in vitro studies, the chemical
composition and characteristics of the cell-culture medium, pH,
ion composition, and serum are significant variables that dictate
the environment. For in vivo conditions, the biological factors
that may contribute to alloy corrosion include the biofilm, organic
acids, types of enzymes produced by oral microorganisms or those
present in food, and phagocytotic cells such as human neutrophils. There are also interaction factors between alloys and the
patient, such as the consumption frequency of acidic foods and
beverages and the composition of saliva.
On the basis of these studies, the release of metal ions cannot
be clearly predicted from the nobility or the overall composition
of cast alloys. Each product must be evaluated individually for its
corrosion behavior and the release of metal ions in specific corrosive environments.

Systemic Reactions
Genotoxic effects have been reported for beryllium and gallium salts. Alteration of DNA repair processes and carcinogenic
effects have been reported for Cd2+, Ni2+, and Co2+. There is some
evidence suggesting that nickel, cobalt, and chromium tend to
increase cancer risk in humans. Beryllium is a documented carcinogen. Although the release of beryllium from alloys containing
beryllium and of Ni2+ and Co2+ from respective alloys has been
documented intraorally and in vitro, there are no studies showing
that these dental alloys cause cancer in patients.
Inhaling metallic dusts from grinding or polishing berylliumcontaining alloys, or fumes such as those encountered in casting
beryllium-containing alloys, can cause berylliosis in individuals
with a hypersensitivity to beryllium. The occupational data indicate that beryllium may increase the risk of lung cancer and other
tumors in humans, especially for those working at beryllium-processing facilities. Thus dental lab technicians would presumably
be at the highest risk of adverse effects from exposure to beryllium
dust and vapors. The use of personal protection equipment (PPE)
is necessary when metallic dusts in the dental laboratory arise during handling.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does the corrosion of metals contribute to their biocompatibility?

Metal Ions Released From Alloys
Dental casting alloys are made corrosion resistant through the use
of noble metals (e.g., high-noble and noble alloys) or the use of
chromium and titanium to form a protective passivation layer on
base-metal and titanium alloys (Chapter 9, Predominantly BaseMetal Alloys). However, some elements in the alloy lose electrons and become cations as they are released in the oral cavity.

CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Which risks are associated with the handling of base-metal alloys? Which
dental personnel are most likely to exhibit adverse effects to base-metal
alloys?

Local Reactions
Figure 17-19 shows the concentrations of a series of metal ions
that, in a cell-culture test, elicited 50% cell death (TC50). The
graph shows that various metal ions differ markedly in their

374

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

3500
3000
TC50 (M)

2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

5

7

10

11

21

33

Ag Zn Cd Hg Au Pt Co Cu Ni Pd Mn Nb Mo Ga Cr In Sn
• Figure 17-19 Cytotoxicity of different metal cations, expressed as the concentration that will kill 50% of
the cells in culture (TC50). Various metal cations elicit a large array of different cytotoxic reactions.

intrinsic (substance-specific) toxicity. In the in vivo situation,
the amount of released metal ions together with their intrinsic
toxicity will determine the biological effect. Copper or zinc has
been added to the metal in metal-ceramic as an oxide former
(Chapter 10, Requirements of Metal Component), which migrates
to the surface and oxidizes during preparation of the metal prior to
ceramic firing. These oxides on the surface release comparatively
large amounts of copper and zinc if they are not covered with
ceramic. The consequence would be gingivitis in patients observed
next to crowns, such as that seen in Figure 17-11. Therefore the
oxide layer on the alloys that is not covered by the ceramic must
be removed.
The toxic potential of a high-gold alloy, two low-gold alloys,
a high-palladium alloy, two Pd-Ag alloys, one Ni-Cr alloy, two
Co-Cr alloys, and a 22k-gold alloy was tested by subcutaneous
implantation in rats. The strongest responses were from the Ni-Cr
alloy, and the weakest response was from the 22k-gold alloy. The
high-gold alloy and the high-palladium alloy showed reactions
similar to that of the 22k-gold alloy. However, the low-gold alloy
and the Pd-Ag alloys ranked between the base-metal alloy and
the high-gold alloys. This study and many other studies showed
that the metallic ions released are responsible for much of the
interaction behavior of dental alloys. However, no general prediction concerning the corrosion behavior and the biocompatibility
based on the composition of the alloy alone is possible. However,
severely cytotoxic alloys generally contain more nickel than those
of biocompatible products.

Allergic Reactions
In a 2009 study, 206 patients underwent patch tests with the
European baseline series because of a suspected contact allergy to
dental alloys. Twenty-eight patients had positive reactions. The
majority of positive reactions occurred for gold sodium thiosulfate, palladium chloride, and nickel sulfate, followed by amalgam,
ammoniated mercury, and cobalt chloride, and then amalgam
alloys and ammonium tetrachloroplatinate. Only 14 patients had
a clinically relevant contact allergy on the oral mucosa (7 with oral
lichen planus and 7 with stomatitis). The conclusions of the study
were that contact allergies to dental alloys are infrequent.
Another study revealed that allergies to alloys in some patients
were manifested not only by lichenoid contact lesions and contact

dermatitis responses but also pustulosis palmaris et plantaris,
which may occur on the hands, the feet, or the entire body. Patch
testing of 167 females and 45 males indicated that 148 (69.8%)
patients had one or more positive reactions toward alloy components. The most common allergens were nickel, palladium,
chromium, cobalt, and tin. A study of 60 persons documented
that nickel has the highest allergenic frequency, followed by chromium, cobalt, silver, copper, palladium, platinum, and gold. A
study suggested that dental patients could even be regarded as a
risk group for metal allergies.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What should the clinician be aware of when using nickel-containing alloys?

Nickel Allergy

Nickel is a potent allergenic metal, with an incidence of allergic
reactions between 10% and 20%. Reactions to nickel are more
common among women, presumably because of the chronic
exposure to nickel through jewelry, although the incidence among
men is increasing. These reactions are probably underreported
because they are often subtle and can resemble periodontal inflammation (Figure 17-8, B) or the erythema that results from excessive pressure on the palatal mucosa by metal frameworks. Not all
individuals with nickel allergy will react to intraoral nickel, and
it is currently impossible to predict which individuals will react.
Because the frequency of nickel allergy is high, it is possible that
individuals will become sensitized to nickel after the placement of
nickel-containing alloys in the mouth.
The mechanisms of the high allergy frequency to nickel are not
known, but there is probably a genetic component. In addition,
the tendency of nickel-containing alloys to release relatively large
amounts of nickel ions probably contributes to their allergenicity.
This release is particularly high in acidic conditions, especially for
Ni-Cr alloys with less than 20 wt% of chromium.
On the other hand, one study investigated 700 Finnish adolescents, 417 girls and 283 boys from 14 to 18 years of age, of
which 476 (68%) had a history of orthodontic treatment with
metallic appliances. The majority (91%) of the girls had pierced
ears. Orthodontic treatment was equally common (67% to 70%)
in the boys and the girls. The study consisted of patch testing

CHAPTER 17

with palladium chloride and nickel sulfate, and a patient history
obtained by a questionnaire and from patient records. The girls
had a much higher frequency of allergic patch test reactions to
nickel sulfate. The results suggest that orthodontic treatment does
not seem to increase the risk for nickel hypersensitivity. Rather,
the data suggest that treatment with nickel-containing metallic
orthodontic appliances before sensitization to nickel (ear piercing) may have reduced the frequency of nickel hypersensitivity.
This has been confirmed by other studies. The results of palladium
chloride patch test are discussed in Ni-Pd Cross-Reactivity section.
Palladium Allergy

Metals of the platinum group exhibit a considerable allergenic
potency. Palladium-based alloys have been associated with
stomatitis and oral localized lichenoid reactions, and palladium
allergy seems to occur mainly in patients who have also been
sensitized to nickel. However, Wataha and Hanks concluded in
1996 that palladium-containing alloys do not generally pose an
increased risk to the health of patients because of the limited dissolution rate of palladium from certain palladium alloys. However,
one should note that the palladium in cast metals may react differently in single-phase compared with multiphase dental alloys,
which tend to be less corrosion resistant. The corrosion products
of these multiphase alloys may affect the allergenicity and the
cytotoxicity of palladium-based alloys differently compared with
single-phase alloys.
Ni-Pd Cross-Reactivity

Of the 700 Finnish adolescents discussed earlier in the Nickel
Allergy section, 44 girls were palladium-chloride-positive, whereas
only 4 boys had a reaction to palladium chloride. Of the 48 adolescents who tested positive to palladium chloride, 45 also had an
allergic patch-test reaction to nickel sulfate. The results support
the concept of cross-reactivity between nickel sulfate and palladium chloride. The co-reactivity of nickel and cobalt has also been
reported.
In a 2018 study by Mittermüller et al. involving 500 patients
(406 females and 94 males) with complaints concerning dental
materials, 70 patients (14%) showed a verified allergy with clinical
symptoms and a positive patch test to an intraoral alloy component. Out of the 500 patients, 234 (47%) had positive patch-test
reactions to at least one of the tested possible allergens, with nickel
(19.2%) and palladium (12.6%) being the most frequent allergens
among these patients. Cross-reactivity to Ni and Pd was found in
39 patients, whereas positive reactions to Ni alone was seen in 57
patients and to Pd alone in 24 patients.
Titanium and Titanium Alloys

Studies have revealed that a surface layer of titanium oxide (mostly
TiO2 with small content of Ti2O3 and TiO) has the ability to coexist with living tissues and organisms. Based on these studies, one
can conclude that titanium is relatively nontoxic and noninjurious.
Recently, allergic reactions were claimed to be one of the causes of
peri-implantitis. Limited clinical evidence shows that this might
be true for very few cases. However, no standard patch test for
titanium has yet been established. Another study links titanium
nanoparticles to nonallergic peri-implantitis, and indeed, a comparatively high amount of such particles has been found around
titanium implants. Ti nanoparticles are hypothesized to be phagocytized by macrophages that are present in the peri-implant tissues as a result of existing biofilm-induced inflammation. Because

Biocompatibility

375

macrophages cannot metabolize Ti particles, they secrete inflammatory mediators to attract more macrophages, thus enhancing
the inflammation. However, the scientific evidence for such a scenario is limited.
Other Metals

Cobalt is another metal that, as a component of dental alloys,
has been found to elicit allergic reactions in sensitized patients.
Also, allergies to gold-based dental restorations have been more
commonly reported. In the presence of gold alloy restorations
the prevalence of gold sensitivity was significantly increased. The
patch tests for gold sensitivity of a group of asymptomatic patients
showed that 24 of 71 (33.8%) patients with dental gold appliances had a positive reaction to gold versus 7 of 65 (10.8%) of the
patients with nongold appliances.
Symptoms of Metal Allergic Reactions

A review of 139 published cases of allergic reactions to dental
metallic restorations showed that 99 patients suffered from local
irritations in the form of gingivitis and stomatitis. Only 33 of
139 patients revealed general or remote extraoral reactions. When
the restorations were removed, 82.7% of the patients recovered
from the allergic reactions. Analysis of these data demonstrates
that local allergic reactions to metals may often be underdiagnosed
as inflammatory reactions. Interestingly, after intraoral application of alloys, both perioral (nickel allergy) and extraoral (cobalt
allergy) skin reactions have been observed. In other studies, localized lichenoid reactions, swelling, and pain in oral soft tissues and
lips have been reported. In several patients, gold ions caused an
allergic contact gingivostomatitis, which was similar in appearance to erosive lichen planus. Many of these patients had a history
of reactions to gold jewelry.
Immunotoxicity of Metals

The induction of immune mediators by metallic materials has been
investigated using lymphocyte cell lines. Expressions of the inflammatory mediator interleukin 2 (IL-2) and the immune effector
IgG by T and B cells were found after incubation with three copper-based casting alloys. The production of these immune mediators was altered by released cations. LPS-stimulated osteoblast-like
cells increased the formation of interleukin 1 alpha (IL-1α) and
TNF-α after the cells were incubated with cobalt, chromium, and
titanium. This study showed that metal ions disrupted cytokine
release, osteoblast function, and the synthesis of type I collagen.
Cytokines can be released from unstimulated and stimulated
peripheral blood mononuclear cells after incubation with chromium ions. In addition, chromium cations can reduce cell viability, DNA synthesis, secretion of IL-6, and expression of soluble
IL-2 receptor. These results suggest that chromium may suppress
the immune system.
Several metal ions (Ag, Au, Cu, Hg, Ni, Pd, Pt, and Zn) have
induced the secretion of proteins from macrophages. Subtoxic
concentrations of a nickel solution also induced an increase of
IL-1α and TNF-α secretion from unstimulated and LPS-stimulated THP-1 monocytes/macrophages. There is evidence that
metallic components derived from cast dental prostheses can
modulate the expression of various immunological factors. An
increased expression of cytokines after LPS stimulation by various cell types indicates that bacterial toxins and cations released
by corrosion may collectively cause inflammatory effects related
to oral mucositis, gingivitis, periodontitis, and alveolar bone
resorption.

376

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Dental Ceramics
The oxides and related compounds in dental ceramics exhibit low
dissolution in normal oral fluids and beverages. However, highly
acidic or basic environments can increase the release rates of certain
metal and silicon ions. For example, acidulated phosphate fluoride
(APF) is known to corrode the surfaces of veneering porcelains
and glaze and stain ceramics. This suggests that APF should not be
used in patients who have ceramic or metal-ceramic restorations.

Adverse Reactions
Several investigators have demonstrated that unlike other dental
materials, most dental ceramics do not induce an adverse effect
when they contact the oral mucous membrane. Others have
shown that glazed ceramics, which have been used in implant
trials, caused very mild inflammatory reactions. These glazed
ceramics were less irritating than resin composite or gold. One
can conclude that minor observed irritations may be attributed
to mechanical irritation (e.g., from roughened surfaces). Dental
ceramics have successfully been used in patients with lichenoid
reaction to replace the originally contacting material. Generally,
polished or glazed dental ceramics accumulate significantly less
biofilms on their surfaces than most other restorative materials.
Radioactivity of Dental Ceramics
Naturally occurring radioactivity has been detected in certain dental ceramics. No adverse effects that are caused by exposure to
radiation from dental ceramics have been documented in the literature. A study reported that the beta-dose rates from natural radionuclides in feldspathic porcelains and glass ceramics were about
10 times higher than that of the background, whereas resin composites, alumina-based ceramics, and natural teeth exhibited negligible beta-dose rates. Concentration activities determined from
gamma-spectrometry ranged from 2.01 to 2.9 Bq/g (becquerel per
gram) 40K. However, these activities are below the threshold limit
of 10 Bq/g for 40K. The specific activities of uranium and thorium
were significantly lower than the levels reported in earlier periods when the addition of uranium to dental porcelain materials
was used to enhance fluorescence. These results confirmed that
patients with veneering ceramics and certain glass ceramics are
subjected to higher dose levels (although well within safety limits)
compared with the general population.

eye damage. A significant concern regarding the use and possible
exposure of tissue to low concentrations of HF for dental applications is that the pain or burning sensations may not be experienced
until several hours after exposure. Because of this delayed effect of
HF to produce severe tissue damage, possibly without pain, all tissues that have been exposed to HF should receive immediate firstaid care, medical evaluation, and follow-up evaluations even if the
injury appears insignificant and no pain is experienced.

Inhalation of HF Fume and Ventilation
Inhaling HF fume can damage the lungs. Delayed effects may not
be apparent for hours after the initial exposure. The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set a limit
for exposure to individuals for airborne concentrations to an average of 3 ppm HF over an 8-hour workday. To minimize inhalation of HF fume, gels and liquids should be used with adequate
ventilation (e.g., fume hood).
Emergency Treatment
When eyes have been exposed to HF, they should immediately be
irrigated at an eyewash station for at least 15 minutes with large
volumes of water while the eyelids are held apart and away from
the eyeballs. In all cases when the eyes have been exposed to acids,
immediate medical attention should be sought.
If small areas of the hand or forearm have been contaminated,
these areas must be immediately and thoroughly washed. If calcium gluconate gel is readily available, rinsing should be limited to
5 minutes so that application of the gel can be quickly initiated in
order to limit the migration of fluorine ions. The calcium gluconate gel should be reapplied to the affected areas every 15 minutes.
If calcium gluconate gel is not available, the affected areas should
be rinsed for at least 15 minutes. Contaminated clothing must
be removed and placed in a hood or plastic bag. Prompt medical
attention should be sought in all instances of skin exposure to HF.
Calcium gluconate gel is available as a commercial product and
is a topical antidote for HF residue on exposed skin. The gel combines with HF to form insoluble calcium fluoride, thereby preventing the extraction of calcium from tissues and bones. Calcium
gluconate has a limited shelf life and should be refrigerated and
replaced with a fresh supply after expiration. Disposable gloves
should be used for applying calcium gluconate gel to the skin.

Glass-Ionomer Cements
Hydrofluoric Acid
Etching of the glass phase of dental ceramics with 5% to 9%
buffered hydrofluoric acid (HF) promotes bonding of resin
composites to etched ceramics. HF formulated for dental usage
is significantly more hazardous than other acids used in dental
labs and in the mouth. Technicians and dentists should be well
informed of the risks and the methods for dealing with accidental
HF exposures.
Several fluorine-containing chemicals used in dentistry—such
as ammonium fluoride, ammonium bifluoride, and sodium fluoride—may react with acid or water to produce HF. One should
review the SDSs of all fluoride compounds to learn the safety precautions that are recommended to reduce the risk of HF exposure.

Exposure of Skin, Mucosa, and Eyes
Concentrated HF (≥50%) is extremely corrosive and destroys skin
or soft tissues upon contact and causes systemic fluoride poisoning.
Exposure of the eyes to HF may result in blindness or permanent

Composition and Release of Substances
GICs (polyalkenoate cements) are acid-based cements that are mixed
from a powder of finely ground glass (containing, e.g., calcium and
sodium fluorophosphoaluminosilicate) and a liquid of polyacrylic
acid (Chapter 7, Glass Ionomer Cement). Resin-modified glass-ionomer cements (RMGIs) are a heterogeneous group of materials that
also contain water-soluble polymerizable monomers, such as HEMA
and polyacrylic acid–modified methacrylate, and special catalysts.
RMGIs polymerize by light activation. Glass ionomers release fluoride mainly after setting as an early burst, then decreasing asymptotically over time. Also, aluminum is liberated, and silver is liberated
from silver-containing products. RMGIs release substantial amounts
of monomers and catalysts.
Adverse Reactions of Conventional Glass-Ionomer Cements

No data have been published indicating any systemic toxic
reaction after using conventional GICs in dental practice. These
materials are nongenotoxic and nonmutagenic.

CHAPTER 17

The Council on Dental Materials, Instruments and Equipment
of the ADA reported in 1984 on severe pain after using GICs as
luting agents, which made the removal of GIC-cemented restorations necessary. Possible causes include incorrect handling, such as
pronounced drying of the prepared tooth prior to cementation;
excessive pressure during cementation; or an insufficient thickness
of remaining dentin. Since the implementation of the revised protocol, there have been no such reports published.
Nonset conventional GICs are cytotoxic, whereas set specimens
are not or are only slightly cytotoxic. This parallels observations
that these materials did not cause any pulp damage in medium
or even in deep cavities in human teeth and those from experimental animals when used as restorative materials. Pulp reactions
were only present when bacteria entered the cavity floor under
the restoration. However, if placed directly on the exposed pulp,
conventional GICs elicited severe pulp inflammation. This was
probably attributable to the fact that conventional GICs do not
completely set in contact with a wet surface. Therefore these materials should not be used for direct pulp capping. Conventional
GICs do not cause any gingival or mucosal reaction, and they do
not elicit allergies.

Adverse Reactions to RMGIs
As a result of the resin components (hydrophilic monomers), some
RMGIs were reported to be genotoxic in vitro, although there are
no reports on tumor formation caused by RMGIs. Some products
are severely cytotoxic, even after the setting. In medium cavities of
human teeth and in experimental animals, no pulp reaction was
observed. In deep cavities, the data are inconsistent and depend
on the individual product. In a study in human teeth, one RMGI
showed pulp damage after the application of an RMGI. Therefore
in deep cavities, a protective liner (e.g., calcium silicate cement)
should be applied, and RMGIs should not be used for direct pulp
capping. Recently, another RMGI product was tested in human
teeth, which did not cause postoperative sensitivity or persistent
pulp damage when applied as a liner in very deep cavities. This
heterogeneity in the biocompatibility of different RMGI products
emphasizes the need for the clinician to be familiar with the current scientific literature. Finally, because of the release of hydrophilic monomers like HEMA or TEGDMA, RMGIs may elicit
allergic reactions in sensitized persons.

Natural Rubber Latex
Of particular interest in dentistry is the use of latex gloves and
latex rubber dams, which expose both patients and dental personnel to this potential allergen.

Composition and Release of Substances
Natural latex products are made from a milky-white sap harvested
from a rubber tree grown in tropical regions. Ammonia, which
is added to the sap as a preservative, hydrolyzes and degrades the
sap proteins to produce allergens. Adding sulfur in liquid latex
and then heating transforms latex into an elastic compound by a
process called vulcanization. The manufacturing process leaches
the allergens by soaking the rubber products in hot water. The
leaching water is changed repeatedly to decrease the concentration
of the allergens, but leaching brings other allergens to the surface
and, unfortunately, places the highest concentrations near the skin
of the wearer. The cornstarch used in powdered latex gloves may
also be the cause of glove allergy, although the allergen in the glove
powder is usually latex released from the glove into the powder.

Biocompatibility

377

Thus the allergenicity of a given batch of latex will be dependent
on how the latex was collected, preserved, and processed.

Allergic Reactions
The clinical symptoms associated with latex are contact dermatitis
and local urticaria but also general urticaria, rhinoconjunctivitis,
asthma, Quincke’s edema, and in severe cases, anaphylaxis. Both
type I and type IV reactions have been reported from contact
with latex. After a 2016 review including data from the literature,
the FDA suggested that the average prevalence of latex allergy
worldwide remains at 9.7% among health care workers, 7.2% for
susceptible patients, and 4.3% for the general population. Natural
rubber latex (NRL) is the most noted cause of contact urticaria
for dental personnel. Dental patients are also a special risk group
because mucosal contact in sensitized individuals usually produces
a stronger reaction than skin contact. Dental students showed an
increasing incidence of type I allergies to latex gloves during the
course of study.
Precautionary Measures
A thorough medical history specifically asking for a possible latex
allergy is mandatory for any new patient in the office and should
be documented throughout the course of treatment and followup. In cases of latex allergy, latex-free rubber-dam products and
nitrile gloves must be used. Dental personnel should try to prevent
a sensitization against latex by using nonpowdered, low-allergenic
latex products or using latex-free products such as nitrile gloves.
If an individual is sensitized, any contact with latex products has
to be avoided. Again, nitrile gloves may be an alternative to latex
gloves.

Patient Reports and Complaints of
Adverse Effects
As mentioned in the discussion of postmarket surveillance, physicians, dentists, pharmacists, nurses, other health care professionals, and any other member of the public can report suspected
adverse effects of medication or devices on the FDA MedWatch
website. The devices also include restorations and implants. The
number of cases related to dentistry is rather low; it is often a challenge to find the cause for the complaints and isolate the dental
material that is responsible.
A national reporting system, the Dental Biomaterials Adverse
Reaction Unit (DBARU), was established at the University of Bergen in Norway to monitor adverse reactions to dental materials in
1993. Similar systems were also established in Sweden in 1996,
which were phased out in 2002, and in the United Kingdom in
1999. Some findings from the current literature are presented next.
A study comprising 500 patients claiming their complaints
were caused by dental materials has been published. Subjective
complaints reported by 490 patients mainly included burning
mouth (44%), tooth-/jaw-ache (22%), and dry mouth (20%).
The main objective intraoral symptoms were tongue anomalies
(14%), gingivitis adjacent to restorations (12%), redness of the
palate or the edentulous ridge (7%), oral lichen planus (6%),
grayish discolorations (5%), lichenoid contact lesions (3%), and
leukoplakia (2%). Only 46% of the patients showed objective
symptoms. Patch tests confirmed the complaints or symptoms in
14% patients, with metals being the most frequent allergens.
Patients with non-oral-related complaints, such as weakness,
headache, or intestinal problems, which have also been reported

378

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

in other studies, are a challenge for the clinician because these
symptoms are unspecific, and there are many potential causes for
these symptoms. For the symptoms of burning mouth or taste
irritation, it should be considered that these are among the most
common side effects of medical drugs. Dry mouth may also be
a symptom for a patient’s Sjögren syndrome. Therefore an interdisciplinary approach to the diagnosis and treatment of these
patients is necessary.
The age and sex distributions of the studies discussed all
show that elderly patients and females predominated. A reason
for this specific age distribution may be the fact that patients in
this age group are exposed to a large number of dental materials. One may assume that the high portion of females in the
middle-aged and elderly age groups might be caused by endocrine changes. However, literature reviews show that the role
of hormones in affecting oral health (e.g., burning mouth) and
hormone replacement therapy is not yet confirmed. It has also
been speculated that females are more likely to report adverse
reactions than males.

change in the composition or processing of a material can cause
a significant change in the material’s biocompatibility. In case of
doubt, clinicians should ask the manufacturer for specific information. They also should request written information from the
lab technicians certifying that the materials used are the ones the
clinician has prescribed and that all instructions for use of the
manufacturer have been followed. Generally, caution is advised
in applying previous biological data and processing principles to
new situations.

CRITICAL QUESTION

In vitro or animal tests are sometimes difficult to relate to clinical
applications. However, there are instances when clinicians do not
have sufficient data from clinical trials to make an informed decision, so they must rely on in vitro or animal tests. Clinicians should
not simply accept nondescript statements, such as “The material
has been subjected to biocompatibility tests, and no adverse effects
were observed,” but should ask for the type of tests used. If clinical
trial results are available, inquiring if the conditions and duration
of the test are relevant for the practice is important.
The quality and relevance of usage test data depend on the fidelity of reproducing the clinical use. If animal or in vitro test results
are the only ones available, then clinicians should question the
design of these tests and the methods employed, making sure that
testing conditions were as relevant as possible, including multiple
types of tests performed under different clinically relevant conditions. A well-controlled comparison with existing similar types of
materials is always preferable to an isolated test on one material.
The known potential or claimed adverse effects of dental materials, such as those summarized in Table 17-1, should be investigated periodically to ensure that patients will be presented with
accurate information related to the benefits and risks of proposed
treatments.

What information is required to judge the safety of metallic, resin composite,
and ceramic products?

Clinical Guidelines for Selecting
Biocompatible Materials
Clinicians need to evaluate claims of the biological safety of new
materials made by the manufacturers. With knowledge of biocompatibility issues, clinicians can make rational judgments about
biological safety. Several critical steps described here will ensure an
informed decision.

Define the Intended Use and Indications for
Restorative Materials
As discussed previously, the intended use of a material plays a
crucial role in the material’s biocompatibility. Clinicians should
inquire when the material is proposed for a new indication and
if the material has been tested in the proposed use. If the material is used in a new way or new environment, more caution is
advised. To minimize the risk of litigation resulting from unexpected adverse events, the lab technician and dentist must adhere
to the instructions for use and use the material as indicated by the
manufacturers. For other applications, such as off-label use, the
practitioner is fully liable for any adverse effects that may occur.
Furthermore, many dental materials are supplied by the manufacturer as a semifinal product, and the dentist finalizes the product
through other processes, such as light curing a resin composite.
Correct handling according to the instructions for use is essential
for acceptable biocompatibility.

Identify the Main Components of the Material
The principal components of materials are listed in the SDS,
but this list is not always complete, and elemental concentrations are not included. This is especially relevant for potential
allergens, where even small amounts in the material may cause
adverse reactions. Studies have shown repeatedly that a small

CRITICAL QUESTION
A sales representative introduces a new restorative material in your office
or at a trade show. What do you need to know from him or her about the
material’s biocompatibility tests?

Evaluate the Safety and Performance of
Dental Materials

CRITICAL QUESTION
Based on the effect of substances eluted from dental materials on the immune
system, who is responsible for deciding which materials are biologically safe
for use—the patient, the dentist, the manufacturer, or the FDA?

Risks Versus Benefits of Dental Materials
The risk of using Ni-Cr alloy for crowns and bridges is the potential of releasing cations as a result of corrosion, especially at low
pH values. These ions may be distributed in the oral cavity and
may enter the systemic circulatory system. The benefit of using
an Ni-Cr alloy over a high-noble alloy is the low cost and higher
elastic modulus of the Ni-Cr alloy. In the case of bis-GMA–based
resin, one of the potential adverse effects is the release of BPA.
However, the quantity of BPA released is extremely small, and the
sealing of pits and fissures in enamel surfaces is a highly effective
means for preventing caries lesions or lesion progression in these

CHAPTER 17

TABLE 17-1

Potential and Claimed Adverse Effects
and Drawbacks of Dental Restorative
Materials

Restorative Material

Potential Adverse Effects

Dental amalgam

Contact dermatitis or sensitization/allergic
reactions to metal elements
Localized lichenoid lesions
Postoperative sensitivity
Thermal sensitivity of pulp
Symptoms of mercury toxicity, especially
neurotoxicity
Environmental concerns

Dental adhesives/
resin composites

Contact dermatitis or sensitization/allergic
reactions to methacrylates
Localized lichenoid lesions
Estrogenic effects of bisphenol A
Postoperative sensitivity from polymerization
stresses and marginal gaps
Pulp damage in deep cavities/pulp exposure
Cytotoxicity or genotoxic effects

Dental alloys

Contact dermatitis or sensitization/allergic
reactions to metals, especially nickel,
cobalt, and beryllium
Localized lichenoid lesions
Thermal sensitivity of pulp
Systemic effects of leached metal ions

Conventional glassionomer cements

Postoperative pain (luting materials)
Pulp damage when placed on exposed pulp

Resin-modified glassionomer cements

Contact dermatitis or sensitization/allergic
reaction to methacrylates
Localized lichenoid lesion
Postoperative sensitivity from polymerization
stresses and marginal gaps
Pulp damage in deep cavities/pulp exposure
Cytotoxicity or genotoxic effects
Systemic effects of other free monomers or
leached substances

Dental ceramic

Respiratory effects from silica dust,
excessive wear of antagonist tooth
structure
Radioactivity
Toxicity of hydrofluoric acid

sites. Both examples depict the process of comparing the risks and
benefits of a material.

Anamnesis (Patient’s Account of Medical History)
Dental practitioners cannot simply follow a “cookbook” approach
to select restorative materials for their patients. Instead, they must
use their best clinical judgment based on scientific evidence and
personal experience with the material and, more importantly,
statements from patients, their physicians, and their previous dentists to ensure that all possible risks are minimized. For example,
local and systemic allergic reactions to many alloys have been
observed, with nickel being the most frequent allergenic element.
Questioning the patient, parent, or caregiver about existing allergies would quickly eliminate certain alloys from consideration.
Also, severe renal disease with impaired renal clearing function is

Biocompatibility

379

a contraindication for amalgam use. Information provided by the
patient should be documented and regularly updated.

Treatment Planning
There is considerable variability in the treatment-planning process. The benefits and risks stated to patients by their practitioners
are also likely to vary significantly from practice to practice. Obviously, some of the decisions will be based on accepting greater
risks for the predicted benefits, whereas others will be based on
a very conservative philosophy, which suggests that the risks of
adverse effects should be exceptionally low. In some of these
cases, when considerable risks exist, no treatment may be the best
choice. For example, if some patients claim that they are allergic
to several types of potential allergens, including metals, cosmetics,
and foodstuffs, extreme caution is indicated to minimize related
items. However, if the restorative treatment is essential to restore
occlusion and function, these risks may be accepted, although
informed consent procedures must still be satisfied before treatment begins. Once the practitioner makes a treatment decision,
the patient should be informed of the benefits and risks of the
proposed treatment and of any alternative treatments. Then, for
medical and legal requirements to be satisfied, the patient must
give his or her consent for the proposed treatment.

Risk Communication
Patients may ask the dentist before the treatment if the materials
selected are safe. From a patient’s viewpoint, safety often means
that nothing bad will ever happen. However, this is not always
possible. One may ask the patients about their hobbies or favorite
sports and then inquire about the potential risks these activities
may carry. The patients may soon realize that there is always a
chance for adverse events to happen.
The clinician can refer to the fact that the probability of
adverse effects from dental materials is generally low (0.3%). In
contrast, the rate of adverse reactions toward cosmetic products
has been reported as 12%. This means that the probability for
an adverse reaction from contact with dental materials is about
40 times less than that with cosmetics if generally accepted good
practice for patient treatment is followed. Finally, the risk should
be “individualized,” meaning the clinician should explain to the
patient the specific situation in the patient’s case, such as allergies, cavity sizes, or the situation of the dentition in general.
This specific and unique expertise enables the clinician to put
Internet-derived information into clinical perspective for individual patients.

Acknowledgments
The contributions of Dr. Ken Anusavice and Dr. John Wataha
to the previous versions of this chapter are greatly appreciated.
Their conceptual descriptions and images were developed for Figures 17-5, 17-6, 17-7, 17-11, and 17-12. Dr. Yeong-Joon Park
provided helpful suggestions and several images. The input of Michael E. Adjodha, Dental Devices Branch, Center for Devices and
Radiological Health, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, is also
greatly appreciated. Dr. Donald Cohen provided clinical images
of lichenoid lesions. The artistic suggestions of Dr. Inchan Ko and
Miss Jihae Ahn are also appreciated.

380

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Selected Readings
Bellinger DC, Trachtenberg F, Barregard L, et al: Neuropsychological and
renal effects of dental amalgam in children: A randomized clinical
trial, JAMA 295:1775–1783, 2006.
Bergenholtz G: Evidence for bacterial causation of adverse pulpal
responses in resin-based dental restorations, Crit Rev Oral Biol Med
11:467–480, 2000.
De Souza Costa CA, Hebling J, Scheffel DLS, et al: Methods to evaluate
and strategies to improve the biocompatibility of dental materials and
operative techniques, Dent Mater 30:769–784, 2014.
DeRouen TA, Martin MD, Leroux BG, et al: Neurobehavioral effects
of dental amalgam in children: A randomized clinical trial, JAMA
295:1784–1792, 2006.
Geurtsen W: Biocompatibility of dental casting alloys, Crit Rev Oral Biol
Med 13:71–84, 2002.

Mittermüller P, Hiller KA, Schmalz G, et al: Five hundred patients reporting on adverse effects from dental materials: Frequencies, complaints,
symptoms, allergies, Dent Mater 34:1756–1768, 2018.
Schmalz G, Arenholt-Bindslev D, editors: Biocompatibility of Dental
Material. Berlin-Heidelberg, 2009, Springer.
Schmalz G, Galler KM: Biocompatibility of biomaterials−lessons learned
and considerations for the design of novel materials, Dent Mater 33:
382–393, 2017.
Schweikl H, Spagnuolo G, Schmalz G: Genetic and cellular toxicology of
dental resin monomers, J Dent Res 85:870–877, 2006.
Wataha JC: Predicting clinical biological responses to dental materials,
Dent Mater 28:23–40, 2012.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult
.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Aalto-Korte K, Alanko K, Kuuliala O, et al: Methacrylate and acrylate
allergy in dental personnel, Contact Derm 57:324–330, 2007.
Ajiboye AS, Mossey PA, IADR Science Information Committee, et al:
International Association for Dental Research Policy and Position
Statements on the Safety of Dental Amalgam, J Dent Res, published
online April 21, 2020.
Aller AJ: The clinical significance of beryllium, J Trace Elem Electrolytes
Health Dis 4:1–6, 1990.
American Dental Association: Reported sensitivity to glass ionomer luting cements. Council on Dental Materials, Instruments, and Equipment, J Am Dent Assoc 109:476, 1984.
American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs: Determination of bisphenol a released from resin-based composite dental restoratives, J Am Dent Assoc 145:763–766, 2014.
Arenholt-Bindslev D, Breinholt V, Preiss A, et al: Time-related bisphenolA content and estrogenic activity in saliva samples collected in relation
to placement of fissure sealants, Clin Oral Investig 3:120–125, 1999.
Arenholt-Bindslev D, Jolanki R, Kanerva L: Diagnosis of side effects of dental materials, with special emphasis on delayed and immediate allergic
reactions. In Schmalz G, Arenholt-Bindslev D, editors: Biocompatiblity of
Dental Materials, Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, Springer, pp. 335–366.
Ashby J, Ishidate M Jr, Stoner GD, et al: Studies on the genotoxicity of
beryllium sulphate in vitro and in vivo, Mutat Res 240:217–225, 1990.
Bellinger DC, Trachtenberg F, Barregard L, et al: Neuropsychological and renal effects of dental amalgam in children: A randomized
clinical trial, JAMA 295:1775–1783, 2006.
Bergenholtz G: Evidence for bacterial causation of adverse pulpal
responses in resin-based dental restorations, Crit Rev Oral Biol
Med 11:467–480, 2000.
Berglund A: Estimation by a 24-hour study of the daily dose of intra-oral
mercury vapor inhaled after release from dental amalgam, J Dent Res
69:1646–1651, 1990.
Bolewska J, Holmstrup P, Moller-Madsen B, et al: Amalgam associated
mercury accumulations in normal oral mucosa, oral mucosal lesions
of lichen planus and contact lesions associated with amalgam, J Oral
Pathol Med 19:39–42, 1990.
Bumgardner JD, Lucas LC, Alverson MW Jr, et al: Effects of copperbased dental casting alloys on two lymphocyte cell lines and the secretion of interleukin 2 and IgG, Dent Mater 9:85–90, 1993.
Clarkson TW, Magos L: The toxicology of mercury and its chemical compounds, Crit Rev Toxicol 36:609–662, 2006.
De Souza Costa CA, Hebling J, Scheffel DLS, et al: Methods to evaluate and strategies to improve the biocompatibility of dental materials and operative techniques, Dent Mater 30:769–784, 2014.
DeRouen TA, Martin MD, Leroux BG, et al: Neurobehavioral effects
of dental amalgam in children: A randomized clinical trial, JAMA
295:1784–1792, 2006.
Ditrichova D, Kapralova S, Tichy M, et al: Oral lichenoid lesions and
allergy to dental materials, Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc
Czech Repub 151:333–339, 2007.
Donati ME, Savarino L, Granchi D, et al: The effects of metal corrosion
debris on immune system cells, Chir Organi Mov 83:387–393, 1998.
Dye BA, Schober SE, Dillon CF, et al: Urinary mercury concentrations
associated with dental restorations in adult women aged 16–49 years:
United States, 1999–2000, Occup Environ Med 62:368–375, 2005.
Eckhardt A, Harorli T, Limtanyakul J, et al: Inhibition of cytokine and
surface antigen expression in LPS-stimulated murine macrophages by
triethylene glycol dimethacrylate, Biomaterials 30:1665–1674, 2009.
Ehrlich A, Kucenic M, Belsito DV: Role of body piercing in the induction of metal allergies, Am J Contact Dermat 12:151–155, 2001.
Ekstrand J, Björkman L, Edlund C, et al: Toxicological aspects on the
release and systemic uptake of mercury from dental amalgam, Eur J
Oral Sci 106:678–686, 1998.
Ersev H, Schmalz G, Bayirli G, et al: Cytotoxic and mutagenic potencies
of various root canal filling materials in eukaryotic and prokaryotic
cells in vitro, J Endod 25:359–363, 1999.

European Commission: Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly
Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR): Opinion on the safety of the
use of bisphenol A in medical devices. Adopted on February 18, 2015.
https://ec.europa.eu/health/scientific_committees/emerging/docs/
scenihr_o_040.pdf.
European Commission: Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly
Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR): The safety of dental amalgam
and alternative dental restoration materials for patients and users.
Adopted on April 29, 2015. https://ec.europa.eu/health/scientific_
committees/emerging/docs/scenihr_o_046.pdf.
FDI World Dental Federation: Recommended standard practices for
biological evaluation of dental materials. Federation Dentaire International, Commission of Dental Materials, Instruments, Equipment
and Therapeutics, Int Dent J 30:140–188, 1980.
Fujioka-Kobayashi M, Miron RJ, Lussi A, et al: Effect of the degree of
conversion of resin-based composites on cytotoxicity, cell attachment,
and gene expression, Dent Mater 35:1173–1193, 2019.
Galler K, Hiller KA, Ettl T, et al: Selective influence of dentin thickness
upon cytotoxicity of dentin contacting materials, J Endod 31:396–
399, 2005.
Galler KM, Schweikl H, Hiller KA, et al: TEGDMA reduces mineralization in dental pulp cells, J Dent Res 90:257–262, 2011.
Garhammer P, Schmalz G, Hiller KA, et al: Patients with local adverse
effects from dental alloys: Frequency, complaints, symptoms, allergy,
Clin Oral Investig 5:240–249, 2001.
Gell PGH, Coombs RRA: The classification of allergic reactions underlying disease. In Coombs RRA, Gells PGH, editors: Clinical Aspects of
Immunology, Oxford, 1963, Blackwell.
Geurtsen W: Biocompatibility of dental casting alloys, Crit Rev Oral
Biol Med 13:71–84, 2002.
Goon AT, Isaksson M, Zimerson E, et al: Contact allergy to (meth)acrylates in the dental series in southern Sweden: Simultaneous positive
patch test reaction patterns and possible screening allergens, Contact
Derm 55:219–226, 2006.
Hallstrom U: Adverse reaction to a fissure sealant: report of case, ASDC J
Dent Child 60:143–146, 1993.
Hannig C, Hannig M: The oral cavity—a key system to understand substratum-dependent bioadhesion on solid surfaces in man, Clin Oral
Investig 13:123–139, 2009.
Hartwig A: Current aspects in metal genotoxicity, Biometals 8:3–11,
1995.
Hayes RB: The carcinogenicity of metals in humans, Cancer Cause Control 8:371–385, 1997.
He X, Reichl FX, Wang Y, et al: Analysis of titanium and other metals
in human jawbones with dental implants—a case series study, Dent
Mater 32:1042–1051, 2016.
Hebling J, Lessa FC, Nogueira I, et al: Cytotoxicity of resin-based lightcured liners, Am J Dent 22:137–142, 2009.
Heese A, Peters KP, Stahl J, et al: [Incidence and increase in type I allergies
to rubber gloves in dental medicine students], Hautarzt 46:15–21, 1995.
Heil J, Reifferscheid G, Waldmann P, et al: Genotoxicity of dental materials, Mutat Res 368:181–194, 1996.
Hensten-Pettersen A: Casting alloys: Side-effects, Adv Dent Res 6:38–43,
1992.
Hildebrand HF, Veron C, Martin P: [Non-precious metal dental alloys
and allergy], J Biol Buccale 17:227–243, 1989.
Hörsted-Bindslev P: Amalgam toxicity-environmental and occupational
hazards, J Dent 32:359–365, 2004.
Hosoki M, Bando E, Asaoka K, et al: Assessment of allergic hypersensitivity to dental materials, Biomed Mater Eng 19:53–61, 2009.
IARC: IARC monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to
Human—Beyllium and Beryllium compounds. Lyon, France, 2018,
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Imazato S: Bio-active restorative materials with antibacterial effects: New
dimension of innovation in restorative dentistry, Dent Mater J 28:11–
19, 2009.
Izumi AK: Allergic contact gingivostomatitis due to gold, Arch Dermatol
Res 272:387–391, 1982.
380.e1

Jones DW: Exposure or absorption and the crucial question of limits for
mercury, J Can Dent Assoc 65:42–46, 1999.
Jonsson F, Sandborgh-Englund G, Johanson G: A compartmental model
for the kinetics of mercury vapor in humans, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
155:161–168, 1999.
Kanerva L, Rantanen T, Aalto-Korte K, et al: A multicenter study of
patch test reactions with dental screening series, Am J Contact Dermat
12:83–87, 2001.
Kanerva L, Toikkanen J, Jolanki R, et al: Statistical data on occupational
contact urticaria, Contact Derma 35:229–333, 1996.
Kansu G, Aydin AK: Evaluation of the biocompatibility of various dental
alloys: Part I—toxic potentials, Eur J Prosthodont Restor Dent 4:129–
136, 1996.
Kansu G, Aydin AK: Evaluation of the biocompatibility of various dental
alloys: Part 2—allergenical potentials, Eur J Prosthodont Restor Dent
4:155–161, 1996.
Karatasli B, Karatasli G, Mete O, et al: Healing of oral lichenoid lesions
following replacement of dental amalgam restorations with feldspathic ceramic inlay-onlay restorations: clinical results of a follow-up
period varied from three months up to five years, Biomed Res Int 2018
(2):1–7, 2018.
Kerosuo H, Kullaa A, Kerosuo E, et al: Nickel allergy in adolescents in
relation to orthodontic treatment and piercing of ears, Am J Orthod
Dentofacial Orthop 109:148–154, 1996.
Khamaysi Z, Bergman R, Weltfriend S: Positive patch test reactions to
allergens of the dental series and the relation to the clinical presentations, Contact Derma 55:216–218, 2006.
Khan MA, Williams RL, Williams DF: Conjoint corrosion and wear in
titanium alloys, Biomaterials 20:765–772, 1999.
Kingman A, Albertini T, Brown LJ: Mercury concentrations in urine
and whole blood associated with amalgam exposure in a US military
population, J Dent Res 77:461–471, 1998.
Krifka S, Spagnuolo G, Schmalz G, et al: A review of adaptive mechanisms in cell responses towards oxidative stress caused by dental resin
monomers, Biomaterials 34:4555–4563, 2013.
Kristoffersen AE, Alraek T, Stub T, et al: Health complaints attributed
to dental amalgam: A retrospective survey exploring perceived health
changes related to amalgam removal. Open Dent J 10:739–751, 2016.
Kuroda K, Endo G, Okamoto A, et al: Genotoxicity of beryllium, gallium
and antimony in short-term assays, Mutat Res 264:163–170, 1991.
Laeijendecker R, Dekker SK, Burger PM, et al: Oral lichen planus and
allergy to dental amalgam restorations, Arch Dermatol 140:1434–
1438, 2004.
Laeijendecker R, van Joost T: Oral manifestations of gold allergy, J Am
Acad Dermatol 30:205–209, 1994.
Langworth S, Elinder CG, Akesson A: Mercury exposure from dental
fillings. I. Mercury concentrations in blood and urine, Swed Dent J
12:69–70, 1988.
Langworth S, Kölbeck KG, Akesson A: Mercury exposure from dental
fillings. II. Release and absorption, Swed Dent J 12:71–72, 1988.
Loden M, Wessman C: Mascaras may cause irritant contact dermatitis,
Int J Cosmet Sci 24:281–285, 2002.
Lygre GB, Gjerdet NR, Gronningsaeter AG, et al: Reporting on adverse
reactions to dental materials-intraoral observations at a clinical followup, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 31:200–206, 2003.
Mackert JR Jr, Berglund A: Mercury exposure from dental amalgam fillings: Absorbed dose and the potential for adverse health effects, Crit
Rev Oral Biol Med 8:410–436, 1997.
Marcusson JA: Contact allergies to nickel sulfate, gold sodium thiosulfate
and palladium chloride in patients claiming side-effects from dental
alloy components, Contact Derma 34:320–323, 1996.
Melchart D, Vogt S, Kohler W, et al: Treatment of health complaints
attributed to amalgam, J Dent Res 87:349–353, 2008.
Meurman JH, Tarkkila L, Tiitinen A: The menopause and oral health,
Maturitas 63:56–62, 2009.
Mittermüller P, Hiller KA, Schmalz G, et al: Five hundred patients
reporting on adverse effects from dental materials: frequencies,
complaints, symptoms, allergies, Dent Mater 34:1756–1768, 2018.
380.e2

Mjor IA, Hensten-Pettersen A, Skogedal O: Biologic evaluation of filling materials. A comparison of results using cell culture techniques,
implantation tests and pulp studies, Int Dent J 27:124–129, 1977.
Munksgaard EC: Permeability of protective gloves by HEMA and TEGDMA in the presence of solvents, Acta Odontol Scand 58:57–62,
2000.
Munksgaard EC, Hansen EK, Engen T, et al: Self-reported occupational
dermatological reactions among Danish dentists, Eur J Oral Sci 104:
396–402, 1996.
Murray PE, Hafez AA, Smith AJ, et al: Hierarchy of pulp capping and
repair activities responsible for dentin bridge formation, Am J Dent
15:236–243, 2002.
Nerdrum P, Malt UF, Hoglend P, et al: A 7-year prospective quasiexperimental study of the effects of removing dental amalgam in 76
self-referred patients compared with 146 controls, J Psychosom Res
57:103–111, 2004.
Nicolae A, Ames H, Quinonez C: Dental amalgam and urinary mercury concentrations: A descriptive study, BMC Oral Health 13(1):44,
2013.
Olea N, Pulgar R, Pérez P, et al: Estrogenicity of resin-based composites
and sealants used in dentistry, Environ Health Perspect 104:298–305,
1996.
Piirila P, Kanerva L, Keskinen H, et al: Occupational respiratory hypersensitivity caused by preparations containing acrylates in dental personnel, Clin Exp Allergy 28:1404–1411, 1998.
Pongprueksa P, De Munck J, Duca RC, et al: Monomer elution in relation to degree of conversion for different types of composite, J Dent
43:1448–1455, 2015.
Putzeys E, Nys S, Cokic SM, et al: Long-term elution of monomers from
resin-based dental composites, Dent Mater 35:477–485, 2019.
Raap U, Stiesch M, Reh H, et al: Investigation of contact allergy to dental
metals in 206 patients, Contact Derma 60:339–343, 2009.
Rajan TV: The Gell-Coombs classification of hypersensitivity reactions: A
re-interpretation, Trends Immunol 24:376–379, 2003.
Ribeiro APD, Sacono NT, Soares DG, et al: Human pulp response to
conventional and resin-modified glass ionomer cements applied in
very deep cavities, Clin Oral Investig 24:1739–1748, 2020.
Rooney JP: The retention time of inorganic mercury in the brain—a systematic review of the evidence, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 274:425–435,
2014.
Schaffran RM, Storrs FJ, Schalock P: Prevalence of gold sensitivity in
asymptomatic individuals with gold dental restorations, Am J Contact
Dermatitis 10:201–206, 1999.
Schmalz G, Arenholt-Bindslev D, editors: Biocompatiblity of Dental
Materials, Berlin-Heidelberg, 2009, Springer.
Schmalz G, Galler KM: Biocompatibility of biomaterials—lessons
learned and considerations for the design of novel materials, Dent
Mater 33:382–393, 2017.
Schmalz G, Hickel R, van Landuyt KL, et al: Nanoparticles in dentistry,
Dent Mater 33:1298–1314, 2017.
Schmalz G, Hickel R, van Landuyt KL, et al: Scientific update on
nanoparticles in dentistry, Int Dent J 68:299–305, 2018.
Schmalz G, Langer H, Schweikl H: Cytotoxicity of dental alloy extracts
and corresponding metal salt solutions, J Dent Res 77:1772–1778,
1998.
Schmalz G, Preiss A, Arenholt-Bindslev D: Bisphenol-A content of
resin monomers and related degradation products, Clin Oral Investig
3:114–119, 1999.
Schmalz G, Schuster U, Thonemann B, et al: Dentin barrier test with
transfected bovine pulp-derived cells, J Endod 27:96–102, 2001.
Schmalz G, Thonemann B, Riedel M, et al. Biological and clinical investigations of a glass ionomer base material, Dent Mater 10:304–313,
1994.
Schmalz G, Widbiller M, Galler KM: Material tissue interaction—from
toxicity to tissue regeneration, Oper Dent 41:117–131, 2016.
Schweikl H, Petzel C, Bolay C, et al: 2-Hydroxyethyl methacrylateinduced apoptosis through the ATM- and p53-dependent intrinsic
mitochondrial pathway, Biomaterials 35:2890–2904, 2014.

Schweikl H, Spagnuolo G, Schmalz G: Genetic and cellular toxicology of dental resin monomers, J Dent Res 85:870–877, 2006.
Scott A, Egner W, Gawkrodger DJ, et al: The national survey of adverse
reactions to dental materials in the UK: A preliminary study by the UK
Adverse Reactions Reporting Project, Br Dent J 196:471–477, 2004.
Sicilia A, Cuesta S, Coma G, et al: Titanium allergy in dental implant
patients: A clinical study on 1500 consecutive patients, Clin Oral
Implants Res 19:823–835, 2008.
Sidhu S K, Nicholson JW: A review of glass-ionomer cements for clinical
dentistry, J Funct Biomater, 2016 16(1-15) 7.
Soares DG, Basso FG, Scheffel DL, et al: Biocompatibility of a restorative
resin-modified glass ionomer cement applied in very deep cavities prepared in human teeth, Gen Dent 64:33–40, 2016.
Spranley TJ, Winkler M, Dagate J, et al: Curing light burns, Gen Dent
60:e210–e214, 2012.
Suri V, Suri V: Menopause and oral health, J Midlife Health 5:115–120,
2014.
Tarlo SM, Sussman GL, Holness DL: Latex sensitivity in dental students and
staff: A cross-sectional study, J Allergy Clin Immunol 99:396–401, 1997.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Biological Responses to Metal
Implants. U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2019.
Vamnes JS, Lygre GB, Gronningsaeter AG, et al: Four years of clinical
experience with an adverse reaction unit for dental biomaterials, Community Dent Oral 32:150–157, 2004.
Van Landuyt KL, Nawrot T, Geebelen B, et al: How much do resin-based
dental materials release? A meta-analytical approach, Dent Mater
27:723–747, 2011.
Veronese I, Guzzi G, Giussani A, et al: Determination of dose rates from
natural radionuclides in dental materials, J Environ Radioact 91:15–
26, 2006.

Wataha JC: Biocompatibility of dental casting alloys: A review, J Prosthet
Dent 83:223–834, 2000.
Wataha JC: Predicting clinical biological responses to dental materials, Dent Mater 28:23–40, 2012.
Wataha JC, Craig RG, Hanks CT: The release of elements of dental
casting alloys into cell-culture medium, J Dent Res 70:1014–1018,
1991.
Wataha JC, Hanks CT: Biological effects of palladium and risk of using
palladium in dental casting alloys, J Oral Rehabil 23:309–320,
1996.
Wataha JC, Hanks CT, Sun Z: In vitro reaction of macrophages to metal
ions from dental biomaterials, Dent Mater 11:239–245, 1995.
Wataha JC, Schmalz G: Dental Alloys. In Schmalz G, Anrenholt-Bindslev D, editors: Biocompatibility of Dental Materials. Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, Springer, pp 211–254.
Widbiller M, Lindner SR, Buchalla W, et al: Three-dimensional culture of
dental pulp stem cells in direct contact to tricalcium silicate cements,
Clin Oral Investig 20:237–246, 2016.
Wrangsjö K, Swartling C, Meding B: Occupational dermatitis in dental
personnel: Contact dermatitis with special reference to (meth)acrylates in 174 patients, Contact Derma 45:158–163, 2001.
Wu M, McIntosh J, Liu J: Current prevalence rate of latex allergy: Why it
remains a problem? J Occup Health 58:138–144, 2016.
Yang J, Shanbhag A, Lilien J, et al: Human neutrophil response to
short-term exposure to F-75 cobalt-based alloy, J Biomed Mater Res
26:1217–1230, 1992.
Yin L, Yu K, Lin S, et al: Associations of blood mercury, inorganic mercury, methyl mercury and bisphenol A with dental surface restorations
in the U.S. population, NHANES 2003–2004 and 2010–2012, Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 134(part 1):213–225, 2016.

380.e3

18

In Vitro Research on Dental Materials
OUTLINE
The Role of In Vitro Research

Limitations of Standards for In Vitro Research

Clinical Relevance of In Vitro Tests

Acknowledgment

Standardization of In Vitro Test Methods

KEY TERMS
Accelerated lifetime testing A research strategy that allows prediction of the performance of products over a long term based
on tests conducted rapidly in the laboratory.
Accuracy The tendency of a test method to provide a result that is
close to the correct result or the tendency of a statistical model
to make a prediction that is close to a later observation.
Clinical relevance Conducting research in a way that closely mimics the conditions present in the clinic and in the patient.
Clinical significance A difference or change in product performance that actually affects the patient’s quality of life.
Design of experiments A research strategy that allows efficient
screening and optimization of design factors.
Effective volume The volume of a hypothetical test specimen
with uniform stress distribution, such as in pure tension, that
would have the same probability of fracture as an actual specimen of interest with nonuniform stress, such as a specimen
tested in flexure mode.

Finite-element analysis An engineering analysis method for
predicting the development of stress and strain in structures or
the flow of energy or fluids through those structures.
In vitro research The testing of materials, drugs, and devices
that is conducted in a basic science laboratory instead of being
conducted in living test subjects.
Precision The tendency of a test method to consistently provide
the same result.
Specification A document that describes one or more mandatory
test methods and, in some cases, minimum acceptable levels of
performance for a product.
Statistical significance A difference or change in product performance that is unlikely to be caused by random sampling error.
Technique sensitivity The tendency of some products to perform
differently when manipulated by different operators.

In vitro research is the testing of materials, drugs, and devices
that is conducted in a basic science laboratory instead of being
conducted in living test subjects. This could mean measuring the
degradation of materials when they are exposed in a test chamber that simulates the chemical composition and temperature
of the oral environment, or testing could include measuring the
mechanical response in a load frame or passing ultrasonic pulses
through test specimens. In other cases, visible light may be measured as light is reflected and transmitted by a specimen to determine the color shade and translucency of the material. Reflection
of infrared radiation and x-rays may also be measured to determine the molecular structure and the crystal structure of materials, respectively. In vitro tests may be conducted using synthetic
materials to hold the specimen in place, or the specimen may be
held by cadaver tissues. Virtual testing may be performed using
three-dimensional (3-D) computer models to predict the performance of dental prostheses made from different materials. These
are only a few examples of the many in vitro test methods used in
the research of dental materials and devices. Some tests involve
placing materials in a culture of living human or bacterial cells and

observing the cellular response. The interpretation of a living indicator provides a greater variety of factors to consider, so cell culture tests are discussed separately in Chapter 17, Biocompatibility.

The Role of In Vitro Research
Students and professionals who are familiar with the topic of
evidence-based medicine may recall that in vitro research is often
placed low in the hierarchy of evidence. The vertical location of
each layer in the evidence pyramid (Figure 18-1) indicates the
relative weight that should be applied to that type of research in
deciding whether a novel dental material or device performs well
clinically. The width of each layer in the pyramid indicates the
relative amount of that type of evidence that is available in the scientific literature. One important aspect of in vitro research is that
there is a large volume of evidence available. However, each bit of
in vitro evidence should be weighted lightly while making decisions about new dental products because those data—although
intended to predict clinical performance—are not actually gathered in a clinical situation and may have little predictive power
381

382

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

individually. Despite these drawbacks, in vitro research still has
an important impact early in the process of developing a dental
product. In vitro results can bolster confidence in the safety of a
product (as measured in terms of chemical durability, mechanical durability, and lack of toxicity) and in the efficacy of a product (as measured in terms of esthetics, dimensional accuracy, or
antimicrobial activity, for example). This confidence is necessary
before conducting clinical studies to avoid endangering human

test subjects and is necessary before conducting animal studies to
avoid being wasteful in the allocation of those expensive and timeconsuming studies.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can we gain confidence in the safety of a product prior to conducting
clinical trials?

Design of Experiments

Filtered
Information

Position
Statements from
Professional Boards
Systematic Reviews
and Meta-Analyses

Randomized Controlled Clinical Trials
(RCTs)

Unfiltered
Information

Longitudinal Observational Studies
(Cohorts)
Case-Control Studies and Cross-Sectional Surveys
In Vitro Studies, Case Series, and Expert Clinical Opinion

• Figure 18-1 The hierarchy of evidence. In vitro studies are located in the
bottom tier, indicating that there is a greater total amount of in vitro data
than other types of data but also indicating that each in vitro study should
be weighted lightly in clinical decision making.

Synthesize
Monomers (4)

Curing
Shrinkage, n = 5
Hydrolytic
Stability, n = 3

There are many combinations of manufacturing parameters to
be tested in the development of a new dental product. Besides
the safety considerations discussed previously, the work requires a
great number of specimens to be fabricated and tested. This means
that it is important for in vitro tests to be precise, rapid, and inexpensive relative to clinical testing. Figure 18-2 shows a flowchart
illustrating how the workflow might be conducted when optimizing the formulation of a dental composite that includes a novel
comonomer. Optimization of a new dental composite is a topic
that has been the focus of much previous research, so for researchers developing the flowchart, guessing as to which few design
parameters will be the most important to control and vary is fairly
easy. Other types of projects contain a greater number of variables. For example, dental implants sometimes have 25 different
design features, and it may not be obvious from the outset which
design features have the greatest impact on the performance of
the implant. Even if each design parameter was tested in only two
conditions, then a full factorial study would require fabricating
and testing 225 = 33,554,432 groups of implants! In such cases,
researchers employ powerful statistical methods with the assistance

Cytotoxicity:
MTT ≥ 80% PS?

Co-monomers
with TEGDMA (3)
30/70, 40/60, 50/50

Exclude from
Further Study
Optimize Curing Shrinkage
(RSM)
1: Co-monomer Ratio
2: Filler Ratio (3 m/700 nm)
3: Filler Volume Fraction

DTS ≥ 65 MPa?
Rank Groups by
Hydrolytic Resistence
& Select the Best One

Curing
Shrinkage ≤ 3%?

Select Next Best
Hydrolytic Resistance

Wear < 60%
Benchmark?

Ready To
Commercialize

• Figure 18-2 Example flowchart for optimizing formulation of a dental composite made using novel
comonomers. Orange arrows indicate the next block after rejection, and blue arrows indicate the next
block after acceptance. Brown arrows indicate the next block after completion. Only the neat polymers
that demonstrate a lack of toxicity according to the MTT assay (in comparison to tissue culture polystyrene)
pass the initial screening. Each monomer that passes is developed into a series of copolymers with triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA). Only the copolymer formulation with the best hydrolytic resistance
and with adequately low curing shrinkage passes the second screening and goes on to optimization of the
filler particles. The final product must exhibit adequate diametral tensile strength and resistance to wear.
(Courtesy Dr. Amol Janorkar.)

CHAPTER 18

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is it important for in vitro tests to be precise, rapid, and inexpensive
compared with clinical testing?

383

In vitro testing

SHigh

Stress level

of research software (design of experiments [DOE] and accelerated lifetime testing [ALT]) or use engineering simulation software (finite-element analysis [FEA]) to conduct in vitro research
as efficiently as possible.
DOE is a research strategy that involves three steps: (1) screening design factors to determine which ones have the greater effect
on performance, (2) identifying the combination of choices for
the important factors that correspond to maximum possible performance (the optimal formulation; i.e., best balance of properties
among those being investigated), and (3) identifying the combination of choices near the optimal formulation that results in the
lowest variability in performance (the least technique-sensitive
formulation). The first step in DOE is usually conducted using
orthogonal arrays. Orthogonal arrays are lists of various combinations of choices for the design factors. Each combination corresponds to a different formulation or test group, and the list is
constructed to be as short as possible by making the simplifying
assumption that the importance of each design factor is independent of the choices for the other factors (no interactive effects).
Orthogonal arrays can be quite efficient. For example, only eight
test groups are needed to screen seven factors when the factors
have two settings each. The second step in DOE involves using
response-surface methods or sequential minimum-energy design
to efficiently explore several possible choices or levels for each
remaining factor. After the design space has been explored, the
design corresponding to the maximum performance (strength,
patient satisfaction, shelf life, etc.) or the minimum cost is identified. Compromise formulations can also be identified to satisfy
multiple performance criteria simultaneously. The third step in
DOE uses Taguchi robust design. This is similar to the second step,
except minimum variability is treated as a performance objective,
and a compromise formulation can be identified between minimizing variability and maximizing other performance measures.
Minimizing variability is important for dental products because
the dentists or dental lab technicians who will use the products
have different levels of experience and have different personal habits of preparing teeth and manipulating materials. A techniqueinsensitive material system performs similarly regardless of the
level of experience of the operator. In the case of a dental restorative material, for example, it is desirable for the product to have
decreased technique sensitivity in addition to lending itself to
forming restorations with a long average lifetime.

In Vitro Research on Dental Materials

SLow

Clinical projection

SClinical
High Stress

Low Stress

Clinical

Logarithm of lifetimes

• Figure 18-3 Regression model for accelerated lifetime testing (ALT).
Specimens are tested in vitro at multiple stress levels, all of which are
more severe than the stresses encountered in the clinical case. A Weibull
distribution is fit to the lifetime data. For each in vitro stress level, the characteristic lifetime (η) by which 63.2% of the in vitro failures have occurred
can be used in an extrapolation to predict the characteristic lifetime that
the dental product would have if used in clinical cases.

ALT can be conducted as constant-stress accelerated lifetime
testing (CSALT) or as step-stress accelerated lifetime testing
(SSALT). In CSALT, each specimen encounters only one level of
stress from the beginning of the test up to the moment when failure is recorded, such as one amplitude of stress in the case of a
chewing simulation. In SSALT, a test specimen starts at a specified
low stress. If the test unit does not fail at a specified time, stress
on the unit is raised and held for a specified time, again. Stress is
repeatedly increased until the test unit fails or the censoring time
is reached. This leads to more rapid testing. However, researchers may have less confidence in clinical lifetimes forecasted from
SSALT data than those forecasted from CSALT data.
It is important to remember that both types of predictions are
extrapolations, and they include a great amount of uncertainty compared with clinical data. There is also a possibility that the levels of
stressors, such as temperature or rate of mastication, may be elevated
so greatly during ALT that degradation processes that would never
occur in the oral cavity may be activated in addition to the processes
that are being accelerated. In this case, inaccurate lifetime predictions
are made. ALT can be used in conjunction with DOE by selecting
clinical lifetime predictions as a performance measure to be maximized. In addition to predicting useful material lifetime in the oral
cavity, ALT can also be used to predict the shelf-life of auxiliary dental
materials such as alginate impression materials.

Accelerated Lifetime Testing

Virtual Modeling

ALT is used to predict the performance of dental materials over a
long period in the patient’s mouth based on tests conducted rapidly
in the research laboratory. This is accomplished by testing material
specimens at several stress levels (all of them being greater than the
stress level of the clinical case). A statistical model is fit to the data to
forecast the lifetime that would probably be observed at clinical stress
levels (Figure 18-3). In ALT, the term stress is used in a general sense
of the response of materials to an external stimulus and does not necessarily imply units of mechanical stress (such as MPa). Nonetheless,
mechanical loading is the most common type of stressor used in ALT,
but other challenges (i.e., temperature, humidity, etc.) may also be
applied either singly or simultaneously.

FEA is an engineering analysis method for predicting the development of mechanical stress and strain or predicting the flow of
energy (heat, electricity, magnetic fields, etc.) or the flow of fluids
through structures. Current applications of FEA are aided by 3-D
models and specialized computer software. A solid model may
be fabricated using computer-aided drafting (CAD) software,
or the model may be imported from a clinical scanner (microcomputed tomography [micro-CT]; Figure 18-4, A). This allows
the modeling of precisely machined parts, such as dental implant
components, and the modeling of parts with custom geometry,
such as fixed dental prostheses and bones and other tissues (see
Chapter 15, Digital Technology in Dentistry).

384

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

A

B

• Figure 18-4 Fatigue test of dental implant system. A, Finite-element model to predict the stress distribution in a dental implant. The heat map (known to researchers as stress contour plot) shows the magnitude of stress on each location of the implant, where hotter colors correspond to high levels of tension
and cooler colors correspond to compression or low levels of tension. B, The physical implant specimen
fractured in vitro during accelerated lifetime testing. Fracture originated at the location that was predicted
by the finite-element model to have the highest stress. (Courtesy Dr. Yuanyuan Duan.)

The solid model is divided into thousands or millions of
minuscule volume elements (Figure 18-4, A), and each element is
assigned properties according to the material that constitutes that
portion of the model. Using a greater number and smaller size
of elements results in more accurate predictions but also requires
more computing time and/or power. An important test of accuracy that is often neglected involves solving an FEA problem
multiple times, with an increasing number of elements in each
iteration. The results should converge on a limiting value. If such
a convergence test is not present with the reported results, then
the FEA predictions may not be accurate. The absolute level of
stress predicted cannot be trusted in this case, but the pattern of
the stress distribution still provides useful information regarding
the locations of higher and lower stress concentration in a dental
prosthesis (Figure 18-4, B).
The most common results to be predicted using FEA are the
stress and strain resulting from mechanical loading. That type of
analysis requires inputting material properties of Young’s modulus
and Poisson’s ratio (Chapter 4, Stress-Strain Properties). The accuracy of material properties depends on the method used to measure them, and if inaccurate material properties are input to the
model or if invalid assumptions are made regarding the anisotropy
(direction dependence) of these properties, then the FEA results
will be invalid. Stress and strain results can be exported to additional postprocessing software that combines these results with
material fatigue testing data to predict the probability of failure
by a specified elapsed time for each element in the finite-element
model and to predict the probability of failure for a dental prosthesis or implant as a whole. FEA can be used in conjunction
with DOE by selecting the probability of failure as a performance
measure to be minimized.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What factors lead to a lack of accurate forecasting in ALT?

Clinical Relevance of In Vitro Tests
For some classes of dental materials, there are in vitro tests that
can predict the performance of a given formulation or the comparative ranking for different formulations, but performance can
be difficult to predict for other applications or classes of materials. For example, David Mahler showed that marginal fracture or
“ditching” in dental amalgam fillings can be predicted by tests of
creep resistance. His finding was that the more ditching-resistant
amalgams lacked a γ2 phase in the microstructure, and that the
formation of the γ2 phase could be avoided by increasing the copper content of the amalgam alloy. The resulting high-copper amalgams produced dental fillings with greatly improved longevity. On
the other hand, Jack Ferracane compiled material property data
from a variety of in vitro tests, and he concluded that the clinical failure of composite restorations is a complex, multifactorial
process that cannot be predicted from an in vitro test or a combination of tests. However, in the early development and screening stages of new dental materials, in vitro tests remain the only
tools we have and thus the best tools that we can use to make an
educated guess regarding which material formulations will exhibit
superior performance.

Precision Versus Clinical Relevance
There are often several competing in vitro tests that can be used
to measure a single material property. For example, dentin bond
strength can be measured by a microtensile bond-strength test, a
button shear test, or a crown-removal test (Figure 18-5). There
are even several variations in the geometry of the test specimen or
the method of load application to choose from when conducting
each of these three test methods. In these cases, there is usually
not a single test method that has superior performance in testing
all kinds of hypotheses related to a particular material property.
Rather, the various test methods are usually distributed across a

CHAPTER 18

Precision

Shear
bond

385

μTBS specimens do not share the similarities with the clinical case
listed previously for the crown-removal test. The button shear test
is somewhere in between the crown-removal and μTBS tests and
is not as well suited for precision testing or for clinically relevant
testing compared with either end of the spectrum. There are some
difficulties with preparing buttons having consistently equal surface area. Recall from the discussion of shear stress in Chapter 4,
Shear Stress that stress distribution upon mechanical loading is
not a constant stress across the adhesive–tooth interface (nor even
pure shear or pure tension at the interface). Whether the button
is loaded using a wire loop (Figure 18-5), flat blade, or a rounded
blade, the shear bond test does not provide much precision, and it
also does not closely resemble the clinical case.

Clinical relevance

Crown
removal

In Vitro Research on Dental Materials

Microtensile
bond

• Figure 18-5 Spectrum of in vitro testing methods. The test configurations shown are different options for determining the strength of bonding
of dental adhesives. The tests are sorted by their clinical relevance and the
precision of strength values. The direction of the arrow show the increase
of clinical relevance from right to left (red arrow) and the increase of precision of strength values from left to right (blue arrow). (Courtesy Dr. Susana
Salazar Marocho.)

spectrum that has a high level of clinical relevance on one end
and a high level of precision on the other end.
In the case of dentin bond-strength evaluation, the removal of an
actual dental crown from a real tooth (that was previously extracted
with permission of the patient) may have more clinical relevance
than the other two test methods. Obviously, the bonded area and
the configuration of the crown-removal test specimen are the same
as in the clinical case, which means that the operator will have the
opportunity during specimen preparation to create a similar number and size distribution of flaws that would be present in a clinical
cementation. In addition, the line angles are similar to those in the
clinical case, which means that there will be a similar profile of stress
concentration. The prepared specimens should also have a similar
thickness of the cement layer, marginal gap size, and opportunity
for hydrolytic degradation when stored in a simulated environment.
The C-factor (ratio of bonded to nonbonded surface area) is also
similar to that of the clinical case, which provides the same opportunity for polymerization-induced stress to develop at the margin
(Chapter 5, Cure Shrinkage and Managing Shrinkage Stress). However, testing an actual dental crown also leads to variability from one
specimen to the next because teeth are unique in their overall shape,
the dimensions of their dentinal tubules, and the degree of mineralization. Thus a lack of precision in the test results can be expected
for the crown-removal test, and this may make detection of any
improvements in bond strength resulting from novel bonding treatments impossible if those improvements are small.
The microtensile bond-strength test (μTBS) is at the other
end of the spectrum. μTBS specimens are fabricated by exposing a flat cross-section of dentin, bonding a restorative material
to that flat section, and then slicing the resultant layered specimen julienne-style by making a series of parallel cuts along both
orthogonal directions. The final specimens are miniscule in size
and are shaped like sticks with the bonded interface perpendicular to the long axis of each stick. There is a high degree of precision because the interface is flat and because several specimens
are prepared from the same tooth. Different bonding protocols
can even be compared on the same tooth by placing a barrier in
the middle of the sectioned tooth during bonding. However, the

CRITICAL QUESTION
When is it more important to use a precise test instead of a clinically relevant
test?

The Weibull Size Effect
Recall da Vinci’s observation that the tensile strength values of iron wires decreased as the length of the wire increased
(Chapter 4, Fracture of Restorations). The work of Griffith showed
that the nominal strength of the material was dependent on the
size of the flaws distributed within the material. Consider that each
unit of volume in a test specimen contains a variety of microscopic
flaws, with a somewhat random distribution of flaw sizes. Thus
a larger specimen having more units of volume also has a higher
probability of containing a large flaw than does a specimen with
a smaller volume. All other factors being equal, the strength of a
specimen is controlled only by the size of the specimen’s largest
flaw, so large specimens tend to have lower strengths on average.
Griffith’s work explained the physical basis of da Vinci’s observation
but did not provide a quantitative relationship between the physical size of the specimen and the strength value. That quantitative
relationship was later provided by Waloddi Weibull’s extreme value
distribution (known today as the Weibull distribution).
In ranking the strengths of different prosthetic materials or in
comparing bond strengths yielded by different dentin bonding protocols, it is important to compare data from similarly sized specimens to
avoid the influence of the size effect on the strength values. From the
bond-strength test examples presented earlier, one should note that
different types of tests use different sizes of specimens, making the
comparison between testing groups difficult. When the size of the test
specimen is smaller than the actual size of the restoration in service,
the comparable material strength values in the form of a restoration
would be of interest to the manufacturers. The statistical approach of
Weibull analysis discussed in Chapter 4, Weibull Modulus, provides
a means of estimating the strength of the objects made of the same
material but different in specimen volume from those tested.
If two groups of specimens made of the same material differ
in size, then eq. 1 can be used to convert from the mean strength
(σ1) of a group of specimens having one volume (V1), to the mean
strength (σ2) that would be expected from the specimens of the
same material prepared in the same way but having a different
specimen volume (V2):
1/ m

 1  V2 
 
 2  V1  .
(1)

386

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

99

350

300

Failure probability (%)

Strength

250

200

150

100

50

10
5

50

1

0

A

Group A Group B Group C

10

B

100
Strength

1000

• Figure 18-6 Statistical analyses of strength values of three hypothetical dental products. Each data set
consists of 30 specimens, and the values are generated by a random generator. A, Bar chart showing the
means and standard deviations of strength. B, Lognormal distribution probability plot (or Weibull graph)
showing the strength distributions for the same three products. A product with a higher mean strength will
have a line farther to right on the Weibull graph. A product with a smaller standard deviation will have a line
with a steeper slope on the Weibull graph. If the probability axis is plotted in interval scale and strength axis
is plotted in ordinary scale, each curve will be shaped like the bacterial growth curve shown in the Weibull
analyses of Figure 4-16.

The exponent (m) in eq. 1 is known as the Weibull modulus,
and the determination of this value has been discussed in detail in
Chapter 4, Weibull Modulus. Essentially, the Weibull modulus is
a measure of variability in specimen strengths—similar in purpose
to the standard deviation except having larger values for specimen
groups with less variability. Figure 18-6 shows a comparison of a
typical bar chart showing means and standard deviations of strength
data for three hypothetical materials and the corresponding Weibull
plots comparing the same set of data. The Weibull plot with the
lowest slope (gold) corresponds to the lowest Weibull modulus and
belongs to the group that has the highest standard deviation. The
Weibull plot that lies farthest to the right (blue) corresponds to the
group with the highest average strength. Lifetime data of restorations can also be characterized using a Weibull distribution.
The use of the conversions described previously requires that
the stress distribution be uniform across all portions of a specimen, as in the pure tensile test mode. If the stress distribution
within the object of interest is not uniform, such as in the bending test mode, the effective volume of the specimen is calculated
and used instead of the actual volume. The effective volume is
the volume of a hypothetical tensile test specimen that exhibits
uniform stress distribution when subjected to loading, and that
has the same probability of fracture as the test specimen exhibiting nonuniform stress distribution when loaded. The effective volume is dependent on the loading method and can be determined
by a calculus operation with respect to the volume of the specimen or the prosthesis. The results have already been published for
the common types of test specimens and loading conditions; for
example, the formulas for a cylindrical rod, a rectangular beam,
and a square beam loaded in flexure were published in 2003.

The graph in Figure 18-7 illustrates the conversion of specimen
strengths according to eq. 1 for several different values of Weibull
moduli. In addition to converting between the results of different
test methods, eq. 1 or Figure 18-7 can be used to estimate the
strength of clinically placed prostheses from strength data gathered in vitro.

CRITICAL QUESTION
When should a statistically significant difference between products be
disregarded?

Clinical Significance Versus Statistical
Significance
When interpreting the results of in vitro tests and using them
as a basis for clinical decision making, it is important to keep in
mind the difference between clinical significance and statistical
significance. Statistical significance is achieved when the difference between two dental products is greater than the difference
that is likely caused by random sampling error. For example, suppose 20 denture teeth of the same manufacturer and model are
tested, and this group of specimens has a chipping resistance of
120.0 ± 0.1 N (mean ± standard deviation). Twenty more denture teeth from a different manufacturer are determined using the
same protocol to have a chipping resistance of 121.0 ± 0.2 N. A
statistician would calculate that there is a highly significant difference between these two products (p < 0.001), which indicates
that the 1.0-N difference between our sample means of 120.0 and
121.0 N has a greater than 99.9% chance of being caused by a

CHAPTER 18

Prosthesis/Test Specimen (%)

100

m = 100
m = 30

75
m = 10

50

m=6

25
m=3

0

High

VTest Specimen/VProsthesis

Low

• Figure 18-7 Graph illustration of eq. 1. The graph shows the effect of
in vitro test specimen size on the ratio of in vitro product strength to the
strength when used in a clinical application having a different volume of
material. Specimens, prostheses, and implants having larger volumes of
material are weaker (assuming uniform stress distribution). Products having a high Weibull modulus (m) are less sensitive to differences in the volume of material.

difference between the manufacturers and a less than 0.1% probability of being caused by random chance during specimen selection. In this example, the ability to detect such a small difference
as being highly significant is made possible by the low standard
errors of both groups. This happens during in vitro research when
a very precise test method is used. The ability to detect statistical
significance with a small difference between groups also happens
during clinical research reports when a meta-analysis includes a
large number of studies and therefore patients. The conclusion
that the manufacturers have products of differing quality is scientifically sound. However, changing clinical decisions based on this
small difference would not make sense. The ability of a removable denture to resist chipping from a bite force of 121.0 versus
120.0 N is clinically insignificant because this difference would
not be expected to affect the benefit that the patients receive from
one product versus the other product, especially considering that
chipping resistance is only one of many performance criteria for
removable dentures (esthetics, fit, chemical stability, etc.). A difference is clinically significant when this difference would make a
noticeable impact on the average patient, and smaller differences
should not influence clinical decisions even when they are shown
to be statistically significant.

Standardization of In Vitro Test Methods
One of the major advances in the knowledge of dental materials and their manipulation began in 1919, when the U.S. Army
requested the National Bureau of Standards (now known as the
National Institute of Standards and Technology or NIST) to
establish specifications for the evaluation and selection of dental amalgams for use in federal service. These test reports were
received enthusiastically by the dental profession, and similar test
reports were subsequently requested for other dental materials.
All findings were published and became common property under
this arrangement. In 1928, dental research at the National Bureau
of Standards was taken over by the American Dental Association
(ADA). In this section, we will describe the role of the ADA and
international organizations in establishing standards.

In Vitro Research on Dental Materials

387

ADA Specifications and Acceptance Program
The ADA, accredited by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), is also the administrative sponsor of two standards-formulating committees operating under the direction of
the ANSI: the ADA Standards Committee on Dental Products
(SCDP) and the ADA Standards Committee on Dental Informatics (SCDI). The ADA SCDP develops specifications for all dental materials and instruments, with the exceptions of drugs and
x-ray films. The ADA Council on Scientific Affairs (CSA) is also
separately responsible for the evaluation of drugs, tooth-cleaning
and tooth-whitening agents, therapeutic agents used in dentistry,
dental equipment, and dental x-ray film.
Working groups of the ADA SCDP or ADA CSA develop the
specifications. When a specification has been approved by the
ADA SCDP and the ADA CSA, this specification is submitted to
the ANSI. On acceptance by this body, the specification becomes
a U.S. national standard. New specifications are continually being
developed to apply to new products. Likewise, existing specifications are periodically revised to reflect changes in product formulations and new knowledge about the behavior of materials in the
oral cavity.
In 1930, the ADA Council on Dental Therapeutics established
the ADA’s Seal of Acceptance program to promote the safety and
effectiveness of dental products. When the ADA CSA assumed
responsibility for developing specifications (standard test methods) in 1966, the CSA also initiated the certification of products
that meet the requirements of these specifications. The Seal of
Acceptance program incorporates these specifications in the evaluation of dental products. When a product is classified as accepted,
the manufacturer is permitted to signify on the label of the product that notation “ADA Accepted.”
In 2005, the ADA decided to phase out the professional products component of the Seal of Acceptance program. Instead, a
decision was made to publish a product evaluation newsletter for
ADA member dentists that focused on a specific category of professional products in each article. This newsletter, called the Professional Product Review, was initiated in July 2006, and the final
phase-out of the ADA acceptance seal for professional products
occurred on December 31, 2007. Keep in mind that the acceptance program for oral care products sold to the general public,
including toothpaste, dental floss, toothbrushes, mouth rinse, and
so forth, is still in place.

International Standards
Two organizations, the Fédération Dentaire Internationale (FDI)
and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO),
are working toward the establishment of specifications for dental
materials on an international level. The ISO is an international,
nongovernmental organization whose objective is the development of international standards. This body is composed of
national standards organizations from more than 80 countries.
ANSI is the U.S. member of the ISO. As of 2018, the ISO had
249 technical committees (TCs). Originally, the FDI initiated and
actively supported a program for the development of international
specifications for dental materials. A request by the FDI to the
ISO that it should consider FDI specifications for dental materials
as ISO standards led to the formation of the technical committee
ISO TC 106—Dentistry. The responsibility of this committee is
to standardize terminology and test methods and to develop international standards for dental materials, instruments, appliances,

388

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

and equipment. More than 180 dental standards have been published by TC 106, and 55 dental standards are currently under
development. The following four subcommittees cover most of
the dental restorative materials products included in the ISO standards program under the direction of TC 106:
TC106/SC1: Filling and Restorative Materials. The following 10
working groups (WGs) are included: WG1—Zinc Oxide/
Eugenol Cements and Noneugenol Cements; WG2—
Endodontic Materials; WG5—Pit and Fissure Sealants;
WG7—Dental Amalgam; WG9—Polymer-Based Restorative Materials; WG10—Dental Luting Cements, Bases,
and Liners; WG11—Adhesion Test Methods; WG13—
Orthodontic Products; WG14—Orthodontic Elastics; and
WG15— Adhesive Components.
TC106/SC2: Prosthodontic Materials. The following 18 working groups develop standards for prosthodontic materials: WG1—Dental Ceramics; WG2—Dental Base Alloys;
WG6—Color Stability Test Methods; WG7—Impression
Materials; WG8—Noble-Metal Casting Alloys; WG10—
Resilient Lining Materials: WG11—Denture Base Polymers;
WG12—Corrosion Test Methods; WG13—Investments;
WG14—Dental Brazing Materials; WG16—Polymer
Veneering and Die Materials; WG18—Dental Waxes and
Baseplate Waxes; WG19—Wear Test Methods; WG20—
Artificial Teeth; WG21—Metallic Materials; WG22—
Magnetic Attachments; WG23—Chairside Denture Base
Relining Materials; and WG24—Frictional Retention.
TC106/SC8: Dental Implants. The eight groups in SC8 are as
follows: TG2—Dental Implant Terminology; WG1—
Implantable Materials; WG2—Preclinical Biological Evaluation and Testing; WG3—Content of Technical Files;
WG4—Mechanical Testing; WG5—Dentistry – Implant
Terminology; WG6—Preclinical Performance Requirements;
and WG7—Evaluation of Connective Interfaces of Dental
Implant Systems.
TC106/SC9: Dental CAD/CAM Systems. The five working
groups in SC9 are as follows: WG3—Digitizing Devices;
WG4—Interoperability;
WG5—Machined
Devices;
WG6—Machinable Blanks; and WG7—Test Methods for
Additive Manufactured Dental Products.
When the term dental materials is used, dental restorative materials are often foremost in mind, but it should be clear from the
list of working groups that there are many auxiliary materials and
many preventative materials that also require testing. For some of
those materials, in vitro tests are needed to gauge a wide variety
of material properties, including mechanical, chemical, magnetic,
and optical properties, among others. The working groups are
continuing to change year to year as new categories of materials
are being introduced, and some categories of materials are becoming obsolete.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why would a specification require using a test that is not the most precise
test method?

Limitations of Standards for In Vitro Research
It is also important to know the functions that standards and specifications are not meant to perform. The minimum performance
limits specified in standards are not representative of the performance of the average product currently on the market. They are

instead minimum acceptable thresholds for safety and satisfactory
performance. In addition, the test methods described in standards
and specifications are not necessarily the best or the most precise methods. Standard tests are limited in that they generally use
inexpensive equipment and supplies that are readily available in
most laboratories, and they generally do not require complex statistical tests. In addition, a standard is not adopted unless this standard
can be agreed upon by many experts having a wide variety of perspectives. This means that standards are only the greatest common
factor between the different methods that are used successfully in
multiple laboratories. In addition, there are some important material
properties for which there is no standard test. This could be caused
by a lack of agreement among experts, by a lack of timeliness in
the approval process, or by the invention of a novel dental product
that cannot be adequately tested using any currently known tests.
For example, fracture toughness is an important metric for comparing ceramics to be used in fixed dental prostheses because fracture
toughness is independent of surface finish, testing environment,
and loading method. The ISO standard for dental ceramics (ISO
6872:2015) does not identify or require a single test for fracturetoughness testing. Instead, the standard contains an informational
appendix that discusses the advantages and disadvantages of several
fracture-toughness test methods. A fracture-toughness test typically
begins with scoring or precracking the test specimen, and the tip of
this precrack should be smaller than the crystalline grains that constitute the material microstructure. Otherwise, overestimation of the
fracture toughness will result. However, the newest and most durable
ceramic materials have submicron grain sizes, and some of the most
popular test methods cannot create a precrack that is sharp enough
to accurately assess the fracture toughness of those materials.
Standards perform an important function in communication
between researchers and in government regulation of products,
as described previously, but the scientific literature often contains
results from different in vitro tests that are more precise or that
more closely mimic clinical conditions. The editorial board of the
journal Dental Materials has begun assigning teams of experts to
coauthor guidance documents for testing material properties that
have proven challenging in the past. These guidance documents
describe the test methods that currently have the maximum possible accuracy or precision in lieu of standards that use easily obtainable equipment. In some cases where a standard allows a range of
test parameters, the guidance document explains why one specific
parameter setting is preferable over another. For example, the ISO
standard for fatigue testing of dental implants (ISO 14801:2016)
allows the holder, which simulates bone holding the implants, to
have any mechanical properties so long as the Young’s modulus
(stiffness) of the specimen holder is higher than 3 GPa. This is conveniently close to the Young’s modulus of many epoxy and acrylic
products that are already present in most material sciences laboratories. Unfortunately, this value is much lower than the stiffness
of a typical jawbone and does not mimic the difference in stiffness
between the cortical and cancellous layers or the anisotropy within
a given layer. Computer models show that this difference in stiffness of the holder material has a strong effect on the results of the
mean lifetime prediction of implant systems, so holder materials
that more closely mimic real bone would be preferable. In some
cases, the most advanced test methods are not feasible for use in
many laboratories, and simple standard tests must be used. For
example, tests that employ cyclic fatigue loading more accurately
mimic the clinical situation, and the use of sliding contact during
the load cycle has been shown to give a different test result than
loading methods that are less clinically relevant. Equipment that

CHAPTER 18

In Vitro Research on Dental Materials

389

is capable of precisely controlling the cyclic loading of specimens
on both horizontal and vertical axes simultaneously can be expensive to acquire and maintain, so ISO 6872:2015 specifies the use
of only monotonic (noncyclic) vertical loading, and this remains
an important common factor for comparing results regarding the
strength of ceramics used in fixed dental prostheses.

Acknowledgment

Selected Readings

Ferracane JL: Resin-based composite performance: Are there some things
we can’t predict? Dent Mater 29:51–58, 2013.
Gurumurthy B, Griggs JA, Janorkar AV: Optimization of collagenelastin-like polypeptide composite tissue engineering scaffolds using
response surface methodology, J Mech Beh Biomed Mater 84:116–125,
2018.
Mahler DB, Adey JD: Factors influencing the creep of dental amalgam,
J Dent Res 70:1394–1400, 1991.
Nelson W: Accelerate life testing—Strep-stress models and data analyses,
IEEE Trans Rel R-29:103–108, 1980.
Weibull W: A statistical theory of the strength of materials. Proc Roy
Swedish Inst Eng Res (Stockholm) 151:1–45, 1939.

Anusavice KJ, DeHoff PH, Fairhurst CW: Comparative evaluation of
ceramic-metal bond tests using finite element stress analysis, J Dent
Res 59:608–613, 1980.
Bhargav A, Min K-S, Feng LW, et al: Taguchi’s methods to optimize the
properties and bioactivity of 3D printed polycaprolactone/mineral
trioxide aggregate scaffold: Theoretical predictions and experimental
validation, J Biomed Mater Res 1:1–9, 2019.
Cardoso PEC, Braga RR, Carrilho MRO: Evaluation of micro-tensile,
shear and tensile tests determining the bond strength of three adhesive
systems, Dent Mater 14:394–398, 1998.
Corazza PH, Duan Y, Kimpara ET, et al: Lifetime comparison of Y-TZP/porcelain crowns under different loading conditions, J Dent 43:450–457, 2015.
Duan Y, Gonzalez JA, Kulkarni PA: Fatigue lifetime prediction of a
reduced-diameter dental implant system: Numerical and experimental study, Dent Mater 34:1299–1309, 2018.

Figure 18-2 was generously provided by Dr. Amol Janorkar, and
Figure 18-4 was generously provided by Dr. Yuanyuan Duan. A
portion of Figure 18-5 was generously provided by Dr. Susana
Salazar Marocho.

Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Anusavice KJ, DeHoff PH, Fairhurst CW: Comparative evaluation of
ceramic-metal bond tests using finite element stress analysis, J Dent
Res 59:608–613, 1980.
Armstrong S, Breschi L, Özcan M, et al: Academy of Dental Materials guidance on in vitro testing of dental composite bonding effectiveness to dentin/enamel using micro-tensile bond strength (μTBS)
approach, Dent Mater 33:133–143, 2017.
ASTM C1239-07: Standard practice for reporting uniaxial strength data
and estimating Weibull distribution parameters for advanced ceramics, West Conshohocken, 2007, ASTM International.
Bhargav A, Min K-S, Feng LW, et al: Taguchi’s methods to optimize the
properties and bioactivity of 3D printed polycaprolactone/mineral
trioxide aggregate scaffold: Theoretical predictions and experimental
validation, J Biomed Mater Res 1:1–9, 2019.
Cardoso PEC, Braga RR, Carrilho MRO: Evaluation of micro-tensile,
shear and tensile tests determining the bond strength of three adhesive
systems, Dent Mater 14:394–398, 1998.
Corazza PH, Duan Y, Kimpara ET, et al: Lifetime comparison of Y-TZP/
porcelain crowns under different loading conditions, J Dent 43:450–
457, 2015.
Dixon WJ, Mood AM: A method for obtaining and analyzing sensitivity
data, J Am Stat Assoc 43:109–126, 1948.
Duan Y, Gonzalez JA, Kulkarni PA, et al: Fatigue lifetime prediction of a
reduced-diameter dental implant system: Numerical and experimental study, Dent Mater 34:1299–1309, 2018.
Duan Y, Griggs JA: Effect of loading frequency on cyclic fatigue lifetime
of a standard-diameter implant with an internal abutment connection, Dent Mater 34:1711–1716, 2018.
Ferracane JL: Resin-based composite performance: Are there some things
we can’t predict? Dent Mater 29:51–58, 2013.
Gurumurthy B, Griggs JA, Janorkar AV: Optimization of collagenelastin-like polypeptide composite tissue engineering scaffolds using

response surface methodology, J Mech Beh Biomed Mater 84:116–125,
2018.
Hondrum SO, Fernandez R, Jr: Effects of long-term storage on properties of an alginate impression material, J Prosthet Dent 77:601–606,
1997.
Karl M, Kelly JR: Influence of loading frequency on implant failure
under cyclic conditions, Dent Mater 25:1426–1432, 2009.
Kim J-W, Kim J-H, Thompson VP, et al: Sliding contact fatigue damage
in layered ceramic structures, J Dent Res 86:1046–1050, 2007.
Lund JR, Byrne JP: Leonardo da Vinci’s tensile strength tests: Implications for the discovery of engineering mechanics, Civil Eng and Env
Syst 18:243–250, 2001.
Mahler DB, Adey JD: Factors influencing the creep of dental amalgam,
J Dent Res 70:1394–1400, 1991.
Nelson W: Accelerate life testing—Strep-stress models and data analyses,
IEEE Trans Rel R-29:103–108, 1980.
Quinn GD: Weibull effective volumes and surfaces for cylindrical rods
loaded in flexure, J Am Ceram Soc 86:475–479, 2003.
Quinn GD: Weibull strength scaling for standardized rectangular flexure
specimens, J Am Ceram Soc 86:508–510, 2003.
Saab XE, Griggs JA, Powers JM, et al: Effect of abutment angulation on
the strain on the bone around an implant in the anterior maxilla: A
finite element study, J Prosthet Dent 97:85–92, 2007.
Sellers K, Powers JM: Kiat-amnuay S: Retentive strength of implantsupported CAD-CAM lithium disilicate crowns on zirconia custom
abutments using 6 different cements, J Prosthet Dent 117:247–252,
2017.
Taguchi G, Phadke MS: Quality engineering through design optimization. In Dehnad K, editor: Quality Control, Robust Design, and the
Taguchi Method, Boston, 1989, Springer.
Weibull W: A statistical theory of the strength of materials. Stockholm,
Proc Roy Swedish Inst Eng Res 151:1–45, 1939.

389.e1

19

Clinical Research on Restorations
OUTLINE
What Is Evidence-Based Dentistry?

Clinical Analysis of Survival and Acceptability

Level of Evidence in Evidence-Based Dentistry

KEY TERMS
Case-control studies Type of study that examines two groups
at a point in time, usually groups with and without disease or
intervention, and makes inferences from these.
Evidence-based dentistry An approach to oral health care that
requires the judicious integration of systematic assessments of
clinically relevant scientific evidence, relating to the patient’s
oral and medical condition and history, with the dentist’s clinical
expertise and the patient’s treatment needs and preferences.

One of the most difficult areas in dental materials research is the
ability to predict their clinical performance through in vitro testing methodologies. The oral environment is almost impossible to
simulate in a laboratory setting because of the many variables that
need to be introduced, such as occlusal forces, the pH of the surrounding environment, diet, the buffering capacity of saliva, and
muscle and soft tissue cleansing action. As such, most in vitro
testing methodologies evaluate how a material responds to a specific testing condition, and the experimental data are used to differentiate between materials. The true test for a restorative dental
material is clinical performance, which includes longevity and
predictability of use. In recent years, there has been a push from
the medical community to implement evidence-based dentistry in
dental education and practice.

What Is Evidence-Based Dentistry?
Evidence-based dentistry (EBD) is defined as an approach to
oral health care that requires the judicious integration of systematic assessments of clinically relevant scientific evidence, relating
to the patient’s oral and medical condition and history, with the
dentist’s clinical expertise and the patient’s treatment needs and
preferences. The types of evidence were ranked, with laboratory
or standardized testing as being the lowest tier of evidence, followed by in vivo observations in the form of clinical studies and
case studies. The highest form of evidence is the controlled, randomized clinical trial, where clinical interventions are allocated
by chance and evaluated based on performance. The randomization eliminates the effect of multiple patient variables, which can
skew results.
390

Fractography The study of fractured surfaces of materials.
Prospective analysis study Type of study that plans interventions, examines the results of these interventions over a period
of time, and makes conclusions.
Randomized controlled clinical trial A prospective study that
randomizes participants and employs a control group.
Retrospective study Type of study that examines past occurrences and interventions and deducts results and conclusions.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are clinical trials essential in testing the performance of dental
biomaterials?

Level of Evidence in Evidence-Based
Dentistry
Among the available hierarchy of evidence, position statements
from professional boards, supported by systematic reviews and
meta-analyses of randomized controlled clinical trials (RCTs),
contribute to the highest level of evidence, followed by RCTs and
cohort studies. These are followed by case-control studies, crossover studies, cross-sectional studies, case studies, and case reports.
Finally, there are animal research and in vitro laboratory testing.
At each level of evidence, there is a body of knowledge, but not all
levels are equally useful for making patient care decisions. As we
progress up the pyramid (see Figure 18-1), the number of studies
and, correspondingly, the amount of available literature decreases
while at the same time, their relevance to answering clinical questions increases. From a dental material point of view, we will discuss the evidence in three categories: in vitro testing, observational
studies, and randomized control clinical studies.

In Vitro Testing
In Chapter 18, the role and relevance of in vitro testing methodologies were discussed. Although necessary, these standardized
tests often evaluate a limited number of variables in one test condition and are not representative of the true oral environment.

CHAPTER 19

Clinical Research on Restorations

391

• Figure 19-1 Scanning electron microscopy of ceramic surfaces before and after 27-day immersion in
buffer solutions. A, Baseline (no immersion). B, pH 2 buffer only. C, pH 7 buffer only. D, pH 10 buffer only.
E, Three cycles of 9-day cycling of pH 2, 7, and 10 sequence (3-day immersion per buffer). F, Three cycles
of 9-day cycling of pH 10, 2, and 7 sequence (3-day immersion per buffer). (From Esquivel-Upshaw JF,
Ren F, Hsu SM, et al: Novel testing for corrosion of glass-ceramics for dental applications, J Dent Res
97:296–302, 2018. doi:10.1177/0022034517732283. Epub 2017 Sep 18. PubMed PMID: 28922616;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5833181, with permission.)

The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) is an
independent, nongovernmental international organization that
develops specifications for products and services to ensure quality, safety, and efficiency. The ISO/Technical Committee 106 (TC
106) was specifically designed to develop standards for dental
materials testing. Unfortunately, dental manufacturers’ adherence
to ISO standards is desirable but not required. Additionally, most
of these in vitro tests cannot be correlated with what occurs in the
oral environment. For example, the ISO 14569 for wear of enamel
and a dental material is measured using a pin-on-disk system. The
setup is that one material is in the form of a disk or a pin and
the opposing material (preferably enamel) is on the other end.
Both materials are rotating in a circular motion on a flat plane.
The reality is that teeth are not flat, and the temporomandibular
joint functions on an arch and then a slide to produce a complex
movement along cuspal inclines and fossae. So, the wear of a dental material as measured by these standards cannot reasonably be
correlated with clinical performance.
Another example is the test for the chemical durability of
ceramic materials (ISO 6872:2015), which is conducted by
immersing the ceramic in a pH 2.4 buffer solution at 80 °C for
16 hours. This scenario does not represent the oral environment
in that the diet of each individual exposes the material to a myriad of pH changes. In addition, the buffering capacity of saliva
continually strives to neutralize this environment to pH 7.4, so
there is a constant fluctuation of pH in the oral cavity. A recent
in vitro study introduced the concept of pH cycling, where glassceramic disks were exposed to a sequence of pH 2, 7, and 10
buffer solutions over a period of 27 days at 80 °C. The effects of
immersion in buffer solutions on the surface of ceramic specimens are shown in Figure 19-1. This study demonstrated that
the surface degradation and material loss was significantly greater

during the pH-cycling testing methodology than the constant
immersion currently being employed as a standard test. The study
proposes that two dissolution mechanisms work synergistically
when the pH is cycled. In an acidic solution, an ionic exchange
mechanism occurs where the network modifiers (Al, Ca, K, Zn)
are exchanged for the ions in solution. This leaves a weakened
corrosive layer on the surface. In a basic solution, a total dissolution process occurs where the Si-O bonds are cleaved, and
the surface layer is corroded. In a constant-immersion environment, a steady state is reached where no further corrosion occurs.
However, in a pH-cycled environment, alternating between acid
and base, the basic solution will attack not only the Si-O bonds
but also the corroded layer produced by immersion in an acidic
environment. Thus there is a constant dissolution process that is
corroding the surface of ceramic. Although the pH cycling test
represents extremes in the oral environment, this method suggests that the current standard of constant immersion could be
underestimating the potential for surface degradation of materials in the mouth. Therefore in vitro testing is ranked as the lowest
form of evidence by EBD standards.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the best type of clinical study and why?

Observational Studies
In vivo observations are the second tier of dental evidence as classified by EBD. These types of studies include retrospective studies,
prospective studies, case-control studies, and cohort studies. The
dental literature is replete with observational studies that examine
the performance of dental materials over time.

392

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Retrospective Studies
Retrospective studies look back in time for applied interventions and
examine the outcome in the present time. For example, a retrospective
analysis can be performed on the longevity of the types of post and
core materials by performing a chart review, categorizing the types of
materials used, and evaluating the duration these post and cores were
in service intraorally. The advantages of these studies are that data are
readily available to be analyzed, and they are relatively inexpensive to
execute. The disadvantages include no standardization of placement of
these materials because there are multiple operators involved, records
may be incomplete, and the presence of multiple variables is very difficult to ascertain. Statistically, there is a higher chance of error with
these types of studies, resulting from confounding variables and bias.
Case-Control Studies
Case-control studies are also observational studies and are generally retrospective. These studies have an outcome status and an
exposure status that are not determined by the investigator. This
type of study will generally examine two groups, one with and one
without the outcome, to determine whether there is an exposure
and try to infer causation. An example of this could be the neurological effects of dental amalgam where investigators identify
groups with an outcome (neurological defects) and an exposure
status (presence of amalgam in their mouths) and try to find an
association. As with retrospective studies, these are relatively inexpensive, although they provide less evidence for causation.
Prospective Studies
Prospective studies can be observational or controlled and randomized, and they are planned longitudinal experiments—for
example, a study comparing the wear of enamel against metalceramic crowns and all-ceramic crowns. These two groups (or
cohorts) can be followed over a specified duration of time to
determine which material is more wear-friendly to enamel. These
studies are more expensive because they have to be planned, and
participants must be followed for long periods of time.

Randomized Controlled Clinical Trials
RCTs are considered the gold standard of evidence-based sciences.
These studies randomize the allocation of participants into groups
to minimize bias and confounding variables and are controlled,
meaning there is the presence of a control group where participants receive no treatment or the current standard of treatment.
These studies are prospective and longitudinal, which is one of
the reasons they are not very common because they are expensive
and logistically very difficult to conduct. An example of an RCT
is comparing the survival of metal-ceramic crowns and ceramicceramic crowns in three-unit fixed dental prosthesis. The metalceramic material serves as the control or the standard of care. The
objective is to determine whether there are advantages to the new
material over the old material and whether these outweigh the
disadvantages.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What are the factors that would limit interventions applied in a clinical study?

Clinical Analysis of Survival and Acceptability
As mentioned earlier, the best form of evidence is clinical performance studies, either as observational studies or randomized and
controlled interventional studies. Because human experiments are

well controlled and regulated by ethical boards, intervention has
to fall within a reasonable benefit-to-risk ratio. In other words, the
risks for conducting the study should not outweigh the benefits,
and no harm should be promoted in the experiment. For this reason, clinical studies are limited to mostly observation of occurrences. For example, a crack cannot purposely be introduced into
a ceramic crown and cemented onto a patient’s mouth to enable
observation of the phenomena of progression of slow crack growth
in vivo. Similarly, a biopsy of a healthy peri-implant site cannot
be performed for the sole purpose of being able to compare bacterial flora to a diseased peri-implant site. This section will describe
several in vivo measurements that are currently being employed
to assess the clinical performance of dental materials. First is a
description of how restorations are being assessed after periodic
performance intraorally. Second are two methods of measuring
and quantifying wear in vivo. Third is a forensic assessment of
clinical fractures through fractographic analysis.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What is the rationale for calibrating evaluators in a clinical study, and why is
there a need for dual evaluation?

Clinical Assessment of Restorations
Perhaps the oldest and most important clinical assessment tool
is the rating scale published by Cvar and Ryge in 1971 in the
U.S. Public Health Service Guidelines (USPHS; Box 19-1). The
original parameters used for evaluating dental restorations were
color match, marginal discoloration, marginal integrity, anatomical form, and the presence of dental caries. The parameters were
graded alfa (A), bravo (B), and charlie (C). These rankings were
created to differentiate restorations that were within the range of
excellent, acceptable, needing future replacement to prevent damage, and needing immediate replacement. The key to the success
of this grading scale is the systematic calibration of the reviewers to ensure that (1) the evaluators are familiar with the grading
scale, (2) they possess the visual discrimination for assessment,
and (3) they maintain consistency in grading longitudinal studies. Another requirement is the implementation of dual evaluators
and a process by which they can resolve differences in grading. The
original study noted that the accuracy of a trained and calibrated
evaluator is about 85%. The inclusion of a second trained and
calibrated evaluator increases the accuracy of the rating to 98%.
One aspect of this study that was never really implemented is the
universal collection of photographs and study models to enable
calibration across clinical studies. With time, modified versions
of the clinical assessment tool have come to include additional
parameters, such as occlusion, postoperative sensitivity, fracture,
retention, and others, depending on the needs of the study and
the restoration being evaluated. Perhaps the biggest obstacle to
clinical studies is cost, which largely explains why most studies
have no controls and only one evaluator.
In 2007, the Fédération Dentaire International (FDI) released
its own version of the clinical assessment of restorations. The FDI
subdivided the different parameters according to esthetic, functional, and biological groups (Box 19-2) for a total of 16 parameters in all. The grading scale was expanded to include clinically
excellent, clinically good, clinically satisfactory, clinically unsatisfactory, and clinically poor. To facilitate calibration between
multiple sites, the FDI also posted an online calibration guide,
but this, of course, is no replacement for the hands-on clinical

CHAPTER 19

• BOX 19.1

Original Cvar and Ryge Criteria Used to
Evaluate Restorations

• BOX 19.2

Color Match
Oscar (O)

Anterior restoration, invisible without a
mirror

Alfa (A)

Posterior restoration, matching the adjacent
tooth in color, shade, and translucency

Bravo (B)

Posterior restoration; the mismatch in
color, shade, and translucency between the
restoration and the adjacent tooth within
normal range

Charlie (C)

Posterior restoration; the mismatch in
color, shade, and translucency between the
restoration and the adjacent tooth outside
normal range

Cavo-Surface Marginal Discoloration
Alfa (A)

No discoloration anywhere on the margin
between the restoration and the tooth

Bravo (B)

Discoloration present but does not penetrate
along the margin toward the pulp

Charlie (C)

Discoloration present and penetrates along
the margin toward the pulp

Anatomical Form
Alfa (A)

Restoration continuous with existing
anatomical form

Bravo (B)

Restoration undercontoured, i.e.,
discontinuous with existing anatomical form
but dentin/base not exposed

Charlie (C)

Restoration undercontoured, i.e.,
discontinuous with existing anatomical form
and dentin/base exposed

Marginal Adaption
Alfa (A)

No visible evidence of a crevice along the
margin into which an explorer penetrates

Bravo (B)

Visible evidence of a crevice along the
margin into which an explorer penetrates
but dentin/base not exposed

Charlie (C)

Visible crevice along the margin with
exposed dentin/base; the restoration is not
mobile, fractured, or missing in part of the
tooth

Delta (D)

Restoration mobile, fractured, or missing in
part of the tooth

Caries
Alfa (A)

Caries absent along the restoration margin

Bravo (B)

Caries present along the restoration margin

calibration that occurs. As with the USPHS scale, investigators are
able to tailor the criteria based on their studies and needs.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What qualities of wear are desirable in a dental material?

Clinical Research on Restorations

393

Fédération Dentaire International (FDI)
Revised Criteria for Evaluating Clinical
Restorations

Esthetic Criteria
Surface luster
Staining: (a) surface and (b) margin
Color match and translucency
Esthetic anatomical form

Functional Criteria
Fracture of material and retention
Marginal adaptation
Occlusal contour and wear
Approximal anatomical form: (a) contact point and (b) contour
Radiographic examination, where applicable
Patient’s view

Biological Criteria
Postoperative sensitivity and tooth vitality
Recurrence of caries, erosion, abfraction
Tooth integrity
Periodontal response
Adjacent mucosa
Oral and general health
For all three groups, the following gradings are used for evaluation:
Clinically excellent/very good
Clinically good
Clinically sufficient/satisfactory
Clinically unsatisfactory
Clinically poor

Wear Analysis
One of the most important criteria for dental materials is durability and compatibility with opposing structures. These two parameters are clearly measured through wear analysis, in that these
materials must be durable enough to withstand occlusal forces
by not wearing away and at the same time exhibiting comparable
wear of opposing enamel. Wear of restorative material surfaces
can cause damage to the opposing structures. A worn surface
usually translates into a roughened surface, which can encourage
plaque accumulation, caries formation, and wear of the opposing tooth surface. Consequently, worn surfaces can result in a
decrease in the occlusal vertical dimension, which could then
lead to occlusal trauma, periodontal disease, and temporomandibular joint dysfunction. As mentioned earlier, the standard test
for wear is not representative of occlusal function. Several wear
machines or chewing simulators were developed that introduced
varying load, vertical and horizontal movement, and thermocycling. However, none of these chewing simulators was found to
correlate well with clinical scenarios. Therefore the best measure
is to determine the wear of enamel and dental materials in a clinical setting. There are two ways to quantify clinical wear: indirect
and direct.

Indirect Method
The indirect method is the most commonly used method for measuring clinical wear. The method is indirect because replicas are
made using an elastomeric impression of the area of interest (dental material and/or opposing tooth enamel), and stone models
are made where the measurements are conducted. The measuring

394

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

devices are diverse and can include laser scanners, micro-computed tomography (micro-CT), or surface profilometers.
A laser scanner produces a three-dimensional (3-D) image
through the movement of an object (in this case, a tooth replica)
under the projection of a laser beam. The reflection of the crosssection profile of the object is detected by sensors, which produces an
image consisting of “point clouds.” Each point represents x-, y-, and
z-coordinates on the scanned surface. Each profile can then be combined and transformed into high-resolution images through advanced software that allows for comparison and measurement. The edge
effect is an error or artifact that is produced when the laser beam hits a
sharp edge or the bottom of a groove, producing overshot reflections.
Laser beam measurements are also affected by surface reflections of
the material being scanned, so stone or elastomeric impression materials are used as replicates to minimize these reflections.
Laser scanners can either have red or blue laser beams. Higherwavelength beams (red beams) have lower resolution, more diffraction, and less intensity compared with the blue laser beams.
Depending on the nature of the material being scanned, the laser
can penetrate through the material to cause a diffusion on the surface, which can result in a loss of focus on the surface being measured and sends inaccurate readings back to the detector, which in
turn leads to invalid measurements.
When measuring the clinical wear of a dental material, a baseline
impression and a replica model of the teeth involved in the measurement are first made. Depending on the study protocol, an impression and replica are once again produced during the designated
follow-up time, either in months or years. The wear that occurred
between baseline and the period of interest are measured using specialized scanners with software that can superimpose images by using
known landmarks and calculating volume loss and maximum wear

depth. Figure 19-2 demonstrates teeth-opposing ceramic crowns
that were monitored for 10 months. Baseline and period replicas
are shown on the left, with yellow arrows pointing to areas that are
worn. A laser scanner device was used to superimpose the two replicas. The image on the right demonstrates red areas that highlight
the areas on the teeth where wear occurred. The maximum wear or
the maximum-wear depth value is perhaps more important than
calculating the volume loss of a material. Volumetric wear can occur
over a large surface area and therefore not be detrimental to the
integrity of the tooth or the restoration if the depth is shallow and
remains superficial. However, maximum wear indicates maximum
depth, which can prove to be more damaging. For example, when
calculating the wear of enamel, if volume loss is large but occurs
over a wide area, the wear can be limited to enamel. However, if
the maximum wear refers to depth and the value is large, then there
is a possibility of wear through the dentin. There are several laser
scanners available on the market that are used for quantifying wear.
Unfortunately, the validity of these measurements is rarely verified
with calibrated instruments such as micro-CT or a profilometer. As
mentioned earlier, there are errors that can be produced from the
laser-scanning process. Figure 19-3 demonstrates the discrepancies
between a laser scanner and surface profilometer in measuring the
depth profile of indentations produced by different-grit diamond
burs on a ceramic surface to simulate wear. This in vitro study evaluated the validity of a red laser scanner in measuring depth and
volume against a surface profilometer, in addition to the effect of
bur grit on these measurements. Gross over- and underestimations
of depth and volume wear measurements were observed with the
laser scanner compared with the surface profilometer. These errors
probably resulted from a combination of the edge effect mentioned
previously, the nature of the material being scanned, and the high

• Figure 19-2 Wear areas (yellow arrows) on teeth noted after 10 months of service on teeth opposing an
all-ceramic fixed dental prosthesis. Comparison software on the far right reveals red areas indicating where
wear occurred. (From Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Young H, Jones J, et al: In vivo wear of enamel by a lithiadisilicate core ceramic used for posterior FPDs: First-year result, Int J Prosthodont 19:391–396, 2006.)

CHAPTER 19

395

Smooth

0
Depth (μm)

Clinical Research on Restorations

-65
-130
-195
Medium

Depth (μm)

0
-65
-130
-195

Rough

Depth (μm)

0
-65
-130
-195
0

1000
Distance (μm)

2000

• Figure 19-3 Depth-profile comparison between laser scanner (red)
and profilometer (blue) indicating major differences in depth and width of
indentations caused by different-grit diamond burs. Edge effect, artifact,
and surface reflectance could be partially responsible for the inaccuracies. (From Hsu SM, Ren F, Abdulhameed N, et al: Comprehensive analysis of laserscanner validity used for measurement of wear, J Oral Rehabil
46:503–510, 2019.)
wavelength of the beams. Nonetheless, although laser scanners are
a convenient tool for measuring clinical wear, the users have to be
judicious in determining the accuracy and the validity of the wear
measurements.
Micro-CT can also be used to measure clinical wear using the
indirect method. Micro-CT uses x-rays to see through an object
slice by slice. These two-dimensional (2-D) images are then rendered through a software program to produce a 3-D model of the
object or analyzed in cross-sections. For the purpose of wear analysis,
wear can be quantified through analysis of the replicas. Figure 19-4
demonstrates the mesial and occlusal views of a dentoform tooth
that has been placed in a chewing simulator to receive random wear
at multiple sites. The micro-CT was used to scan the tooth before
and after wear occurred, and the results are shown in Figure 19-4,
where the colored areas refer to the areas of wear, which are quantified according to the grid shown on the side.
Surface profilometry can also be used for quantitative wear
evaluation using the indirect technique. The contact profilometer
has a stylus that traverses the surface of the object being measured,
whereas the noncontact profilometer uses a laser beam or white
light to probe the surface. The contact stylus is usually a metal
or diamond ranging from 2 to 20 μm in diameter loaded with a
contact load of few millinewtons while contacting the surface. The
scan can provide a map of the surface topography. Although this
method is considered precise for depth profilometry, the process is
time consuming. For this type of measuring device to be effective,

• Figure 19-4 Three-dimensional reconstructed image from micro-CT
scan of a dentoform tooth demonstrating wear. A, Mesial (or distal) aspect.
B, Occlusal surface. The color bar to the side reflects wear depth in millimeters. (From Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Hsu SM, Bohórquez A, et al: Novel
methodology for measuring intraoral wear in enamel and dental restorative
materials, Clin Exp Dent Res 8:1–9, 2020, doi:10.1002/cre2.322. PubMed
PMID: 32955159; with permission.)

reference points need to be placed on the teeth of interest to orient
the user to the exact area being measured.

Direct Method
With the advent of digital impressions, this method uses the
technology of intraoral scanning to allow quantitative wear
measurement. The teeth to be measured are scanned at baseline
and then again at periods of interest. These scans are then compared using comparison software that essentially superimposes
both images and identifies the differences in depth and volume
between the two. The process of intraoral scanning is technique
sensitive. Some intraoral scanners use a powder spray of zinc
oxide to minimize the reflection of enamel during the scanning
process. The area being scanned has to be completely isolated so

396

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

• Figure 19-5 Direct method of wear measurement using intraoral scanner. A, A ceramic crown on mandibular left first molar. B, Opposing left maxillary quadrant. C, The result of superimposing baseline and
1-year scan to quantify the wear that occurred on the ceramic crown (pointer) by the comparison software
using the adjacent second molar as the enamel control. The color bar to the side reflects wear depth on
the ceramic restoration and the enamel control in millimeters. D, The result of opposing maxillary first molar. (From Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Hsu SM, Bohórquez A, et al: Novel methodology for measuring intraoral
wear in enamel and dental restorative materials, Clin Exp Dent Res 8:1–9, 2020. doi:10.1002/cre2.322.
PubMed PMID: 32955159; with permission.)

that saliva does not mix with the powder. The powdery sludge
can become thick and cause an error in the scanning process.
There is also the steep learning curve associated with operating
the software. The scanned images have to be adeptly cropped
to minimize noise in the superimposition. Figure 19-5 is an
example of the direct method. Figure 19-5, A & B depict clinical
images of two opposing quadrants, with the crown on the mandibular left molar being the area of interest and the opposing
tooth on the maxillary. These teeth were scanned at baseline and
then again at 6 months, and the images (Figure 19-5, C & D)
demonstrate the amount of wear (color grid in millimeters) during this period of time. Although this is perhaps the most convenient and expedient method for quantifying wear, the technical
sensitivity and the errors that could be associated with scanners
have to be considered.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What forensic information can we ascertain from fractographic analyses?

Critical Observation and Fractographic Analysis
A fractured restoration can fall under the modified version of the
USPHS under functional criteria. However, fracture surfaces often
reveal information about how and why the fracture occurred. That
is why the critical observation and analysis of fractures deserves a
separate section in this chapter.

Characteristics of Fracture Surface
Fractography is the study of the fracture surfaces of materials.
Through characteristics visible on the surface of these fractures,
the origin of the fracture, the load and orientation of the fracture, and the progression of the failure can be determined for
the particular material. There have been significant advances in
the application of fractography to the understanding of fracture
mechanics. Several works have identified the key parameters
that are important to the understanding of why fractures occur.
When a material fractures in a brittle manner, the fracture surface
records the event in such a way that many important features are
made clear. A schematic diagram of a typical crack in glass or
ceramic is depicted in Figure 19-6. Some very prominent features
of these cracks are the origin, mirror, mist, and hackle. These features, when visible by magnification, can usually give an indication as to the propagation direction of the fracture. The presence
of any residual stresses can be determined from the fractured area
and the stress at which fractures occur, which can be measured
from the crack size.
Almost all mechanically induced cracks can be idealized as a
semielliptical, sharp crack with depth, a, and width, 2b (Figure 19-6).
Recall the discussion of the Griffith energy approach to fracture and
the following equation (Chapter 4, Fracture Toughness):
K lc  Y  f c  2 E c ,

(1)

CHAPTER 19

Clinical Research on Restorations

397

Crack path Porcelain
Interaction
zone
Metal

• Figure 19-6 Schematic diagram of crack in a brittle material with the
critical flaw size and the different features that can enable calculation of
stress and the direction of fracture.

where KIc is the critical stress intensity factor (fracture toughness),
Y is a geometrical factor that accounts for the shape of the fractureinitiating crack, E is the elastic (Young’s) modulus, c is the radius of
an equivalent semicircular or semielliptical crack (c = ab ), and γc
is the critical fracture energy (i.e., all the energy involved in fracture, including the creation of new surfaces). The small semiellipse
in Figure 19-6 represents the initial flaw size, and the large semiellipse is the critical flaw size that leads to fracture. Because the value
of KIc can be obtained from testing standardized specimens, the level
of stress causing the fracture can be calculated by the measurement
of equivalent semielliptical crack, c. For further information on the
process involved with fractographic analysis, the reader is referred
to the fractographic books and articles mentioned at the end of this
chapter.
Clinical fractures of metal-ceramic restorations, although rare,
still occur, especially when a new alloy or veneering porcelain is
being used or when a new technology has been adopted. As is
generally true for all dental materials, there is a learning curve
associated with the initial use of new products. Although there is
an infinite number of fracture paths that may occur, three types
are of particular importance in diagnosing the cause of fracture.
Figure 19-7 shows the fracture paths that have occurred primarily at three sites in a metal-ceramic crown: (1) along the interfacial region between opaque porcelain (P) and the bonding zone
(I) between porcelain and the metal substrate (top), (2) within
the bonding zone (center), and (3) between the metal and the
bonding zone (bottom). For conventional metal-ceramic crowns
made from cast copings, the bonding zone is synonymous with
the metal oxide layer.

Characterization of Fracture Surface
To characterize the principal site of fracture, a low-magnification
examination of the fracture surface may be sufficient in a few
cases. However, a magnification of 3 to 100 times is more often
required because minute microstructural details such as pores
may reveal wake-hackle patterns that clearly show the direction
of crack propagation in these areas. Fractographers seek important
crack features, such as hackle, twist hackle, wake hackle, arrest
lines, and compression curl, to lead them toward the critical flaw
or source of crack initiation and the possibility of identifying one
or more mechanisms of failure.
Each of the three principal fracture paths in Figure 19-7 is
indicative of excessive tensile stress, a material defect, or a processing factor. The location and appearance of a fracture sur-

• Figure 19-7 Cross-sectional illustration of three principal types of interfacial zone fracture in a metal-ceramic crown.

face are major factors used to determine the cause of fracture.
For fractures that are confined to the occlusal surface of posterior crowns, a cone-crack type of fracture (apex of the cone
at the fracture surface and the base of the cone extending into
the veneer) suggests that localized loading at small contact areas
may be the cause. Fractures that occur in the proximal occlusal
area of the crowns may be caused by inadequate support of the
veneer by the core framework material. Fractures that occur well
away from the sites of loading may be caused by thermal incompatibility stresses. The procedures for obtaining evidence from
fractured all-ceramic restorations are the same as those used for
metal-ceramic restorations.
When fractures occur, making a vinyl polysiloxane impression
of the fracture site as soon as possible is useful for future fractographic analysis. All information on the crown or bridge should
be recorded, including the visual appearance of the fracture site. A
photograph is also very helpful in analyzing the potential cause of
fracture. The impression allows a replica of the fracture surface to
be made from epoxy resin. The replica allows fractographic observations of the fracture surface to be made, and these models can
then be examined by a fractography expert under low magnification using optical microscopy and stereomicroscopy, followed by
scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The location of the critical
flaw indicates the origin of the fracture. Fracture surface markings observed on the replica assist the expert in determining the
origin and confirming the suspected cause of fracture. Shown in
Figure 19-8, A is a residual section of a fractured Procera AllCeram
alumina-based crown with a glass-phase veneer that fractured after
4 years of clinical service. The cause of fracture can be assessed by
visual inspection, characterization of principal fracture features,
detailed examination of optical microscopy and stereomicroscopy
images, and if necessary, SEM images. The stereomicroscopic
analyses of the retrieved fractured segment revealed the fracture
paths that are shown in Figure 19-8, B. They include crack initiation (areas 1 and 3), crack propagation (areas 2 and 4), and
completion of fracture (area 5). Area 3 illustrates the initiation of
a cone crack that could have led to cone-type fracture discussed
earlier but did not propagate far enough to cause the bulk fracture. This fracture analysis illustrates incidental surface damage in

398

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

• Figure 19-9 Inspection for cracks using fiberoptic transillumination
prior to cementation is important in improving the predictability of ceramic
crowns.

• Figure 19-8 Analysis of a fractured restoration. A, Fractured Procera
AllCeram premolar crown. B, Sketch of key findings after stereomicroscopic analyses of the retrieved fractured segment. The initiating crack
occurred at the mesial margin (area 1) and propagated upward approximately 2 mm before crown fracture occurred in areas 2 and 4, terminating
in the compression curl area 5. Area 3 represents contact damage within
the occlusal veneering ceramic that does not extend into the alumina core
ceramic. C, Confirmation of the finding by scanning electron microscope
image. (From Scherrer SS, Quinn GD, Quinn JB: Fractographic failure
analysis of a Procera® AllCeram crown, Dent Mater 24:1107–1113, 2008.)

an area where crack propagation was localized only in the veneer
ceramic. Figure 19-8, C is the confirmation of five fracture surface
features in the sketch by the SEM image. This forensic analysis of
how the fracture progressed was made possible by the different
landmarks that are prominent on fractured brittle surfaces.

The fractographic procedures described previously are based on
the assumption that the prosthesis was free of cracks during tryin and during cementation. However, dentists are not typically
trained to inspect prostheses received from the lab using fiberoptic transillumination. Examination under such lighting can
reveal surface and subsurface cracks that may exist in the ceramic
and metal-ceramic prostheses either before or after try-in for fit.
Figure 19-9 shows a laboratory technician who is using a fiberoptic light source to inspect a ceramic prosthesis for cracks that may
be hidden from typical fluorescent or incandescent light sources.
Many factors are associated with the fracture of all-ceramic
prostheses. These factors fall into one of eight categories: (1)
inherent surface defects, (2) processing defects, (3) loading (bite
force and load orientation), (4) design, (5) material properties, (6)
residual stress, (7) procedural errors, and (8) diet. Within these
categories, the following variables may contribute to crack initiation, crack propagation, chipping, and bulk fracture: surface
treatment, excessive loading during try-in, bruxing loads, loading location, load distribution, load magnitude, transient cooling
stresses, residual cooling stresses, inadequate tooth preparation,
improper core framework design, inadequate crown thickness,
inadequate core thickness, improper connector size, quality of
the cement layer, bond quality of ceramic veneer to core ceramic,
voids in the cement layer or at the cement/ceramic interface,
and the elastic moduli of component and supporting substrate
materials. To reduce the risk for ceramic fracture, sufficient tooth
reduction, sufficient thickness of the ceramic, adequate prosthesis
design, distributed vertical loading, and meticulous attention to
the recommended manufacturers’ procedures are required.

Classification of Ceramic Restoration Fractures
Grading fractures of ceramic restorations has been recommended
and is based loosely on the original USPHS criteria for grading
restorations. Heinzte and Rousson introduced the classification in
2010, with Class 1 being minor, no intervention required; Class
2, repair was needed; and Class 3, replacement was required.
Figures 19-10 to 19-12 illustrate three clinical scenarios of what
these classes look like clinically. Figure 19-10, A shows a veneered
zirconia crown with a class 1 lingual fracture. The fracture was small
enough that even the patient did not know there was anything

CHAPTER 19

Clinical Research on Restorations

399

• Figure 19-10 Class 1 fracture. A, Minor fracture on the lingual side of a ceramic-ceramic crown; no
intervention required. B, Scanning electron microscope identifies the fracture origin (arrow) on the occlusal
surface and propagated gingivally, as shown by multiple arrest lines (arrow). (From Esquivel-Upshaw JF,
Mecholsky JJ Jr, Clark AE, et al: Factors influencing the survival of implant-supported ceramic-ceramic
prostheses: A randomized, controlled clinical trial, J Dent X3:100017, 2020; with permission.)

• Figure 19-11 Class 2 fracture. A, Fracture at distal edge (arrow) of a veneered zirconia; repair needed.
B, Fractographic analysis identifies the critical flaw on the occlusal surface of the restoration. (From
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Mecholsky JJ Jr, Clark AE, et al: Factors influencing the survival of implant-supported ceramic-ceramic prostheses: A randomized, controlled clinical trial, J Dent X3:100017, 2020, with
permission.)

wrong. SEM analysis (Figure 19-10, B) reveals the origin of the
fracture to be on the occlusal surface of the crown. Figure 19-11,
A is a class 2 fracture of a veneered zirconia crown on the distal
edge. Although the indication is to have this repaired because the
fractured surface is substantial, these repairs made with composite
resin and a silanating agent usually fail within a couple of years.
Fractographic analysis (Figure 19-11, B) revealed that the fracture also originated from the occlusal surface of the prosthesis.
Figure 19-12, A & B is a class 3 fracture, also of a veneered zirconia crown. The fracture went through the veneer and fractured the
core substructure. However, fractographic analysis (Figure 19-12,
C-E) revealed that the fracture originated from the occlusal surface
and propagated through a series of multiple fractures.

In summary, the performance of dental materials is best determined through clinical trials and observations because there are
no in vitro tests that mimic the oral environment. However,
there are limits to what can be measured intraorally, and interventions have to be ethical. The contributing factors to failure
are very difficult to ascertain without performing a systematic
forensic analysis (such as in fractography). The biggest drawback
is that these clinical tests, if done properly, are expensive and
very time consuming. By the time the results are released for
a poorly performing material, the manufacturers might have
already moved on to the promotion of another discovery. Thus
the feedback that should be gleaned to improve the next generation of materials is lost.

400

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

• Figure 19-12 Class 3 fracture. A, Occlusal view of a fractured veneered zirconia; needs replacement.
B, Mesial-facial view showing fracture through the zirconia core. C–E, Series of fractographic analysis
demonstrates multiple fractures that propagated from one on the occlusal surface. Circles indicate the
area expanded in the succeeding images. (From Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Clark AE, Shuster J, et al: Factors
influencing the survival of implant-supported ceramic-ceramic prostheses: A randomized, controlled clinical trial, J Dent X3:100017, 2020, with permission.)

Selected Readings
Cvar JF, Ryge G: Reprint of criteria for the clinical evaluation of dental
restorative materials, 1971, Clin Oral Invest 9:215–232, 2005.
Esquivel JF, Kim MJ, Abdulhameed N, et al: Randomized clinical study
of wear of enamel antagonists against polished monolithic zirconia
crowns, J Dent 68:19–27, 2018.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Clark AE, Shuster J, et al: Randomized clinical trial
of implant-supported ceramic-ceramic and metal-ceramic fixed dental prostheses: Preliminary results, J Prosthodont 23:73–82, 2014.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Ren F, Hsu SM, et al: Novel testing for corrosion of
glass-ceramics for dental applications, J Dent Res 97:296–302, 2018.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Rose WF, Barrett AA, et al: In vivo wear of core
ceramic, veneers, and enamel antagonists at three years, Dent Mater
28:615–621, 2012.

Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Rose WF, Oliveira ER, et al: Randomized, controlled clinical trial of bilayer-ceramic and metal-ceramic crown performance, J Prosthodont 22:166–173, 2013.
Freiman SW, Mecholsky JJ: The Fracture of Brittle Materials: Testing and
Analysis, Hoboken, NJ, 2012, John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Hickel R, Peschke A, Tyas M, et al: FDI World Dental Federation clinical criteria for the evaluation of direct and indirect restorations.
Update and clinical examples, J Adhes Dent 12:259–272, 2010.
McMurphy TB, Harris CA, Griggs JA: Accuracy and precision of fractal
dimension measured on model surfaces, Dent Mater 30:302–307, 2014.
Mehl A, Gloger W, Kunzelmann K-H, et al: A new optical 3-D device for
the detection of wear, J Dent Res 76:1799–1807, 1997.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult
.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Cvar JF, Ryge G: Reprint of criteria for the clinical evaluation of dental
restorative materials, 1971, Clin Oral Invest 9:215–232, 2005.
Ekfeldt A, Fransson B, Soderlund B, et al: Wear resistance of some prosthodontic materials in vivo, Acta Odontol Scand 51:99–107, 1993.
Esquivel JF, Kim MJ, Abdulhameed N, et al: Randomized clinical study
of wear of enamel antagonists against polished monolithic zirconia
crowns, J Dent 68:19–27, 2018.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Clark AE, Shuster J, et al: Randomized clinical trial
of implant-supported ceramic-ceramic and metal-ceramic fixed dental
prostheses: Preliminary results, J Prosthodont 23:73–82, 2014.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Dieng F, Clark AE, et al: Surface degradation of
dental ceramics as a function of environment pH. J Dent Res 92:467–
471, 2013.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Ren F, Hsu SM, et al: Novel testing for corrosion of
glass-ceramic for dental applications, J Dent Res 97:296–302, 2018.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Rose WF, Barrett AA, et al: In vivo wear of core
ceramic, veneers, and enamel antagonists at three years, Dent Mater
28:615–621, 2012.
Esquivel-Upshaw JF, Rose WF, Oliveira ER, et al: Randomized, controlled clinical trial of bilayer-ceramic and metal-ceramic crown performance, J Prosthodont 22:166–173, 2013.
Folwaczny M, Mehl A, Kunzelmann KH, et al: Determination of changes
on tooth-colored cervical restorations in vivo using a three-dimensional laser scanning device, Eur J Oral Sci 108:233–238, 2000.
Freiman SW, Mecholsky JJ: The Fracture of Brittle Materials: Testing and
Analysis, Hoboken, NJ, 2012, John Wiley & Sons Inc.

Heintze SD, Cavalleri A, Forjanic M, et al: A comparison of three different methods for the quantification of the in vitro wear of dental
materials, Dent Mater 22:1051–1062, 2006.
Hickel R, Peschke A, Tyas M, et al: FDI World Dental Federation—
clinical criteria for the evaluation of direct and indirect restorations.
Update and clinical examples, J Adhes Dent 12:259–272, 2010.
Hsu SM, Ren F, Abdulhameed N, et al: Comprehensive analysis of
laserscanner validity used for measurement of wear, J Oral Rehabil
46:503–510, 2019.
International Organization for Standardization: Dental Materials – Guidance on Testing of Wear – Part 2: Wear by Two- and/or Three Body Contact (ISO 14569-2:2001), Geneva, Switzerland, 2001.
Lambrechts P, Braem M, Vuylsteke-Wauters M, et al: Quantitative in vivo
wear of human enamel, J Dent Res 68:1752–1754, 1989.
McMurphy TB, Harris CA, Griggs JA: Accuracy and precision of fractal dimension measured on model surfaces, Dent Mater 30:302–307,
2014.
Mehl A, Gloger W, Kunzelmann K-H, et al: A new optical 3-D device for
the detection of wear, J Dent Res 76:1799–1807, 1997.
Passos VF, Melo MAS, Vasconcellos AA, et al: Comparison of methods
for quantifying dental wear caused by erosion and abrasion, Microsc
Res Techniq 76:178–183, 2013.
Rodriguez JM, Bartlett DW: A comparison of two-dimensional and
three-dimensional measurements of wear in a laboratory investigation, Dent Mater 26:e221–e225, 2010.
Whitehead SA, Shearer AC, Watts DC, et al: Comparison of two stylus methods for measuring surface texture, Dent Mater 15:79–86,
1999.

388.e1

20

Emerging Technologies
OUTLINE
Biomaterials

Instruments and Processes

Biological Materials

Summary

KEY TERMS
Bioactive Having an effect on or eliciting a response from living
tissue, an organism, or a cell, especially in inducing the formation of superficial hydroxyapatite.
Bioinductive Capable of inducing a response in a biological
system.
Biomaterial Any matter, surface, or construct that interacts with
biological systems.
Biomimetics Study of the formation, structure, or function of biologically produced substances and materials (e.g., silk or nacre)
and biological mechanisms and processes (e.g., protein synthesis or mineralization) for the purpose of synthesizing similar
products by artificial mechanisms that mimic natural structures.
CAD-CAM CAD refers to computer-aided design technology, based
on the use of computer software and systems to assist in the creation, modification, analysis, and optimization of two-dimensional
or three-dimensional models of objects. Any computer program
that embodies computer graphics and an application program
that facilitates engineering functions in the design process can
be classified as CAD software. The term CAM refers to computeraided manufacturing of a restorative device using the CAD input
file. CAM may be additive (buildup) or subtractive (machining of a
device from a larger starting piece of material).

Cytology The harvesting of disaggregated cells and related microscopic material for analysis of disease.
Nanotechnology Technology that focuses on the atomic and
molecular scale (<100 nm) of materials, devices, and other structures. On this scale, in which at least one dimension must be
below 100 nm, quantum mechanics (quantum theory) controls
material properties or behavior.
Osteoconductive Capable of acting as a matrix or scaffold to
facilitate new bone growth on its surface.
Self-assembling materials Disordered materials that form an
organized structure or pattern as a consequence of specific,
local interactions among the components, without external
direction.
Smart materials Synthetic materials that interact with external
stimuli, such as light, temperature, stress, moisture, pH, and
electric/magnetic fields, in such a way as to alter specific properties in a controlled fashion and return to the original state after
the stimulus has been removed.
Voxel Volumetric picture element that represents a single sample,
or data point, on a regularly spaced three-dimensional grid. It
is analogous to how pixel defines a point in two-dimensional
space.

The materials and devices in current use are effective, but improvements in performance are always needed. For instance, caries-prevention treatments have reduced the need for initial restorations,
replacement restorations, and removable dentures. Minimally
invasive dentistry concepts have led to the removal of less tooth
structure and the sealing of leaking defective margins of restorations. Nonetheless, because of the promotion of higher-cost
esthetic restorations, sometimes at the expense of durability, the
need for both repair and replacement of restorations will continue
because resin restorative materials fail and degrade over time. Thus
the choice of materials for a given clinical situation will continue
to be based on a comparative analysis that balances cost, benefits,
and risks. Until caries is considered truly “curable,” there will be
a need for novel solutions, such as remineralizing agents, smart
materials, and durable repair and replacement materials that
avoid the need to repeatedly restore teeth. The focus of emerging
applications of dental materials is primarily on the prevention,

detection, and treatment of caries, periodontal disease, and oral
cancer. These materials are often called dental biomaterials
because of the increase of interaction with the biological systems.
New dental biomaterials must satisfy the following requirements: (1) be nontoxic to human cells, (2) not support the growth
of microbes and fungi, (3) be able to form an excellent seal between
the oral cavity and underlying tooth structure, (4) be sufficiently
bioactive to stimulate in vivo repair of tissues, (5) have properties
similar to the tissue that is to be repaired or replaced, (6) exhibit
handling properties that allow ease of manipulation and promote
optimal clinical performance, (7) exhibit an esthetically pleasing
appearance, and (8) are cost-effective.
In the following subsections, research and technologies are
discussed for their relevance to solving oral health–related problems. Figure 20-1 depicts a flowchart of basic, translational, and
clinical research representing stages in the development of emerging technologies and products. The farther to the right of the chart
401

402

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

Research
stage

Basic
research

Technology
classification

Emerging
technology
concepts

Nanotechnology
advances

Nanotechnology
validation

Established
nanotechnology

Integrated
nanotechnology
and
microtechnology

Spin-off
technology

Cost-benefit
demonstrated

Testing
stage

Hypothesis
testing

Product
evaluation

Bridge between
basic/applied and
clinical practice

Pilot and
retrospective
studies

Randomized
controlled trials

Performance
appraisal

Refinement of
technologies

Outcomes

Preliminary
data

Comparative
performance

Preliminary
evidence

Validation of
evidence

Promising
treatment
outcomes

Optimum
treatment
outcomes

Adoption by
clinical
practices or
dental labs

Further
refinement
needed

Technologies
applied to
health care
tasks

Oral health
care goals
fully achieved

Application of
refined
technology

Demonstrated
benefits in
lab and
clinic tasks

Fully
documented
and wellestablished
evidence

Probable future
technologies,
materials, and
devices

Likely future
technologies,
materials, and
devices

Proven future
technologies,
materials, and
devices

Stage of
technology
development

Level of
evidence

Level of
success

Applied/transitional research

Technologies are feasible

Clinical
simulation

Proof of
concept

Desirable technologies,
materials, and devices

Clinical trials

Technologies are imminent
or validated

Probability of
specific
outcomes

Limited
applicability of
technology

Possible future
technologies,
materials, and devices

Applicability to
dental practices

• Figure 20-1 Flow chart of basic, translational, and clinical research links to develop and evaluate emerging technologies and products. The downward
arrows show the sequence of steps taken in the process. The rightward arrows show the increasingr probability of having a desirable clinical outcome.

a technology or material is, the higher the probability that this
material will have a desirable clinical outcome. The discussion is
divided into three sections: biomaterials, biological materials, and
instruments and processes.

Biomaterials
Any matter, surface, or construct that interacts with biological systems is considered to be a biomaterial. In the present context, only
synthetically derived or highly processed nonsynthetic materials
(materials of biological origin) are discussed. In dentistry, these are
also preferably known as dental materials.

CRITICAL QUESTION
In which ways will nanotechnology provide products or processes that can
improve oral health outcomes?

Nanotechnology
Nanotechnology uses nanosized particles and surface features
with very high ratios of surface area to volume that are usually
different in their bioactivity, solubility, and antimicrobial effects
compared with larger particles of the same composition. Thus
changes in properties cannot be extrapolated by an inverse linear analysis of particle size but must be determined through in
vitro and in vivo testing of the nanomaterials. In dentistry, nanotechnology had been focused on the development of nanoparticle

fillers to improve dental composite esthetics. The use of nanotechnology today is more diverse.
In biomimetics, nanotechnology is being used to develop
materials that promote hard tissue remineralization. Biomimetic
materials and processes mimic those that occur in nature, particularly self-assembly of components to form, replace, or repair oral
tissues. These concepts are discussed further later in this chapter.
For dental implants and related devices, nanoparticles are used
to modify dental implant surfaces to influence the host response
at the cellular and tissue levels. Electrophoretic sol-gel fabrication,
pulsed laser deposition, sputter coating, and ion-beam–assisted
deposition are among the approaches used to develop nanotextured, thin-film, biocompatible coatings for implant surfaces.
These technologies reduce the thickness of the coating layer and
increase the specific surface area and reactivity to improve the
interaction with the surrounding apical tissue.
Important nanoparticles include metals, such as silver, and
ceramic powders, such as silica and titanium dioxide. In situ–
generated silver nanoparticles have been reported to be highly
effective in restorative resins, bonding resins, and prosthetic resins for inhibiting a variety of biofilm-forming bacteria while not
interfering with manipulation, curing, mechanical properties, or
other performance properties. Silica nanoparticles already have
wide use in dentistry, from toothpastes to composites. Titania
nanoparticles are widely used for pigments in dental materials but
lack the stronger antimicrobial effects of Ag.
Another recently introduced nanotechnology kills bacteria
on contact on restoration surfaces. Infinix flowable composite

CHAPTER 20

(Nobio Ltd., Israel), which contains quaternary ammonium
bound to silica (also known as QASi) was reported to significantly
reduce Enterococcus faecalis on the surface of the material without
affecting composite flexural strength, radiopacity, depth of cure,
water sorption, or water solubility. After 6 and 12 months of use
in vivo, there was a 50% reduction of live bacteria on Nobio QASi
composites compared with control composites. An added advantage of the QASi-containing surfaces is that no “recharging” is
needed, unlike the fluoride in glass ionomers that confers microbial resistance. Prevention of bacterial biofilm protects the integrity of the dental product restorations.

Resin Restorative Materials
Despite the recent innovations in increasing the service life of
contemporary resin composites (see “Innovations in Dental Composites” in Chapter 5, Classification of Composites by Unique
Properties), significant uncertainty exists regarding the interactions of bacterial biofilms, wear, and fatigue leading to recurrent
caries. Thus further improvements are needed in order to greatly
increase the clinical life of resin-based restorations to match and
even surpass the durability of amalgam, the gold standard, and
eliminate the need to repair the restored teeth. To this end, major
goals for restorative materials continue to be the reduction of
composite shrinkage during curing, porosity, wear and attrition,
improvement of the composite–dentin interface, and increasing
the degree of conversion of resin monomers.
One factor that influences restorative longevity is operator
error. Materials with many steps, the requirements for a dry field,
difficult handling, or long curing times are inherently prone to
mistakes that often lead to material defects, such as voids and
inadequate curing, which hasten the onset of fatigue, fracture, and
abrasion. Thus more technique insensitive (“forgiving”), operatorfriendly, esthetic, and long-lived composites are being developed.
As discussed in Chapter 5, Classification of Composites by
Manipulation Characteristics, two novel flowable composites
marketed as “bulk-fill, universal restorative resins,” G-aenial
Universal Flo (GC America, Alsip, IL) and Surefil-SDR flow
(DENTSPLY International, York, PA), among others, exemplify
operator-friendly materials that are translucent and have flowable rheology, easy handling properties, and a large depth and
degree of conversion. Both exhibit low shrinkage and shrinkage
stress, which allow the composite to be placed in large increments
instead of the prescribed 2-mm layers, further contributing to
their technique insensitivity. Because these highly flowable composites contain reinforcing filler on a par with the highly loaded,
nonflowable, and “packable” hybrids, such as those described in
Chapter 5, Classification of Composites by Manipulation Characteristics, their performance is similar to those of current posterior
resins, raising expectations of high durability and long clinical life.
Early-stage wear resistance and durability tests have validated the
benefits of their high filler loading, low curing stress, and high
level and depth of cure.
Filtek Universal (3M ESPE, St. Paul, MN) is a recent addition (2019) to the category of operator-friendly composites.
The nanoparticle fillers in this composite provide superior shade
matching and wear resistance. This composite contains two
unique monomers: addition-fragmentation monomer (AFM) and
aromatic urethane dimethacrylate (AUDMA). The AFM fragments and repolymerizes during curing, reducing curing stress and
enhancing marginal integrity. The AUDMA decreases the number
of reactive groups in the resin and increases polymer flexibility.

Emerging Technologies

403

Fewer reactive groups moderate the volumetric shrinkage, and the
increased polymer flexibility reduces the stiffness of the polymer
matrix before the matrix reaches the gelation point. Both of these
contribute to decreased curing stress, improved marginal integrity,
and ultimately, improved abrasive wear resistance.
Omnichroma (Tokuyama Dental America) is a single-shade,
universal composite that matches every tooth shade, from A1 to
D4. The innovative material contains 260-nm spherical nanoparticles that can scatter red-to-yellow colors as ambient light impinges
on and is reflected from the composite. The red-to-yellow scattering blends with the scattered light of the adjacent dentition to
produce an esthetic color match and reduces operator sensitivity.

Bioactive Materials
Most present-day dental materials do not induce dental tissue
responses and are not bioactive. Bioactivity is defined in ISO
23317 as a property that elicits a specific biological response at
the interface of the material, which results in the formation of a
bond between tissue and material. As such, bioactivity incorporates antimicrobial, remineralizing, and bone-forming materials,
as discussed in this section. Bioactive materials implanted in a living body form a thin layer rich in Ca and P on their surface. The
material then connects to the living tissue through this apatite
layer without a distinct boundary. Bioactive materials are useful
for the healing of tissues, especially pulp and periapical tissues,
and for supporting root development in immature teeth.
Bioactive materials available now include calcium hydroxide,
bone grafts, bioglass particulates, and hydraulic (water-setting)
ceramic powders. The calcium–silicate powders are considered
the gold standard for endodontic surgical procedures, pulpotomy,
revascularization, and apexification procedures. The calcium aluminate–based powders, being more acid-resistant, are being used
with glass ionomers for supragingival cement for prosthodontics
and have found limited use for restorative applications. Their acid
resistance makes them useful for infected sites, which are generally
acidic; as such, the aluminates may be used for the same indications as mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) materials. Calcium
phosphate cements are generally slower-setting than the hydraulic
cements but are being used for scaffolding purposes where the formation of hydroxyapatite is necessary and porosity is acceptable.
Theobromine, a xanthine found in cocoa, promotes the formation of hydroxyapatite mineral and increases the size of hydroxyapatite crystals by upregulating osteogenesis, which would have
numerous benefits. For instance, theobromine may remineralize adjacent tooth enamel and have the potential to close gaps
between restoration and tooth, improve bond-strength durability associated with reduced bond degradation, and enhance bone
integration with implant surfaces. The large crystallite size leads
to resistance to dissolution via the decreased specific surface area
available for acid dissolution. New bioactive materials are under
development that, in general, will create a biomimetic “presence”
in vivo that induces healing superior to those of many present-day
dental materials.
Dental resins have been combined with bioactive TiO2 nanoparticles to promote hydroxyapatite formation, enhance mechanical
strength, and act photo-catalytically as a bactericidal agent. A dentin
bonding adhesive with TiO2 nanoparticles can provide on-demand,
photo-induced microbial inhibition and simultaneously fill marginal
gaps via remineralization of adjacent dentin and enamel. This technology may reduce recurrent caries, improve tissue integration with
implant surfaces, and prevent peri-implantitis or other infections at

404

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

the tissue–implant interface. These results are intriguing and highly
promising, but they have not yet been tested clinically.
The surface of materials is often what makes them bioactive. Titanium as an implant material is an example. Like chromium, titanium spontaneously reacts with oxygen to form a
self-repairing, protective oxide layer (TiO2), which makes the
implant surface largely corrosion-resistant, inert, and biocompatible. However, surface roughness and other aspects of surface
topography, together with surface chemistry, are also known
to strongly influence the early events in healing and osseointegration that follow implant placement. Interactions between
proteins, cells, tissues, and implant surfaces play a role in determining the success or failure of all implanted materials and
devices. The surface chemistry and topography-related mechanisms that control these events are poorly understood. Nevertheless, substantial research effort in dental implantology is
currently directed at developing surfaces with controlled topography and chemistry at the nanoscale level to optimally promote
protein adsorption and cell adhesion. Biomimetic calcium phosphate coatings for implants are under development to enhance
osteoconductive properties and incorporate biological agents to
accelerate bone healing in the peri-implant area. Overall, these
research efforts to understand and control surfaces are showing
great promise, and some are likely to lead to materials, processes,
and/or procedures to enhance the reliability of placement, indications for use, and the success rate of dental implants.

Antimicrobial Materials
Preventing and removing biofilms is important for pediatric dentistry and especially periodontics and endodontics. Adjunctive
liquids are needed that can quickly kill and remove bacterial colonies in biofilms during periodontal scaling. In endodontics, new
irrigants are needed to better remove and deactivate smear layers
containing remnant bacteria after root canal preparation, which is
never complete. Some endodontic irrigation liquids are combined
with acids or surfactant to dissolve the dentinal smear layer created
by endodontic instruments in a root canal. Combination devices
containing a drug, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), or amino
acids are envisioned for endodontic and periodontal uses. Two such
combinations, QMIX and MTAD (DENTSPLY Inc.), are irrigants
in endodontics.
Endodontics has been dramatically changed by the introduction of hydraulic ceramic (water-setting) cements that create highpH environments and thereby have antimicrobial properties. For
example, the tricalcium silicates and calcium aluminates have
enhanced endodontic and pulpal treatment with their antimicrobial properties and dimensional stability.
Although the clinical performance of dental resins has
improved remarkably in durability, bond strength, and esthetics,
most still lack antimicrobial properties and allow bacterial colonization and biofilm formation. Antimicrobial monomers are being
investigated and developed to prevent recurrent caries better than
composites that release fluoride ions. Ideally, the polymerized resins would have sustained antimicrobial characteristics. Examples
include modified (chlorinated) polyethylene or other polymers
that may provide antimicrobial activity.

CRITICAL QUESTION
What stages of research will lead to the adoption of new remineralizing
materials and processes for dental practice?

Remineralizing Agents and Materials
The dental literature reflects a strong demand for preventive and
“healing” therapies for individuals at moderate risk for caries to
prevent a shift to a high level of risk. Thus low concentrations of
fluoride are included in toothpaste, well water, and other fluoridated sources to have beneficial effects on enamel and dentin
remineralization.
Other remineralizing agents include the use of nanoparticles
of hydroxyapatite because they are on the same crystalline scale as
naturally occurring hydroxyapatite crystals in enamel or dentin. A
promising example of this approach was reported by Li et al. in
2008, who found that 20-nm nanohydroxyapatite particles had
a superior anticaries repair effect compared with that of larger
hydroxyapatite particles.
Liquid remineralizing dentin bonding agents, which should
wet, flow, and completely fill the demineralized zone created by
etching prior to or simultaneous with bonding to the restorative
material, are also being developed. For instance, a tricalcium silicate product was tested with polyacrylic acid and sodium tripolyphosphate for remineralization. When these materials were applied
under a restorative material, the combined material infiltrated the
demineralized collagen fibrils with precursors that restored the calcium phosphate at the interfaces of the dentin and the restorative
material. Incorporation of some of these technologies into primers and dentin bonding agents are expected to both inhibit caries
activity and increase the service life of composite restorations.
Theobromine, a bioactive agent discussed earlier, is an alternative to fluoride as a remineralization agent. Theobromine is
currently used in Theodent toothpaste products (Theodent LLC,
New Orleans).
Emerging technologies and materials that promote remineralization at early and moderately advanced stages of caries are
being developed more rapidly now that highly sensitive imaging
and measurement processes are available (Chapter 15, Diagnostic
Systems).

Bone-Grafting Materials
In addition to remineralizing small lesions, gross remineralizing
treatments and bone grafts are increasingly needed for dentistry.
Bone-grafting materials are necessary for various oral surgeries,
such as alveolar ridge augmentation and sinus augmentation, and
for the placement of implants or to improve mandibular denture
stability. Extraction socket grafting materials are gaining popularity to prevent the collapse of cortical bone and enable the placement of an implant. Also, patients prefer faster treatment and
fewer surgeries, which drives research and development toward
single-stage implant procedures with immediate functional loading (IFL). Implants with nanotechnology coatings may increase
the success and acceptability of the single-stage and IFL procedures, but before implant placement, grafts are often needed.
Graft materials are available containing allogeneic, xenogeneic,
or synthetic hydroxyapatite particles to act as a scaffold for gradual replacement by the patient’s bone. These current bone grafts
slowly resorb, and the replacement bone densifies over months
until a restorative denture or implant can be made. More rapid
resorption and bone-growth-stimulating materials are needed to
meet the demand for faster implant placement after tooth extraction, even immediate placement. Some available grafting materials
are designed for faster resorption and bone growth. For instance,
PepGen P-15 (DENTSPLY Friadent, Mannheim, Germany), a

CHAPTER 20

hydroxyapatite product with an amino acid, is available for accelerating natural bone regeneration. Infuse (Medtronic, Minneapolis,
MN), a collagen sponge with recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2), is indicated for sinus augmentation
and localized alveolar ridge augmentation. BMPs, also known as
cytokines, represent a group of growth factors that can affect cell
interactions and cell behavior. PerioGlas and NovaBone Dental Putty (NovaBone Products, Jacksonville, FL) contain coarse
(>100 μm) bioglass particles for implantation as a resorbable scaffold for bone growth and periodontal grafting. Ostim-Paste (aap
Biomaterials GmbH, Dieburg, Germany) is a nanocrystalline
hydroxyapatite paste that can be used to repair the intraoral bony
defects that may result from cystectomies (a surgical procedure to
remove a cyst), root tip resections, extractions, and surgical tooth
removal; for augmentations in the areas of the alveolar processes
and maxillary sinuses (sinus lift); and for filling periodontal defects.
Clinical trials are needed to determine the success of each of these
approaches and guide the development of future products.
New bioactive glasses are under development that contain
more boron and silica than the original formulas of 45S5 bioglass
(45 wt% SiO2 and a 5:1 ratio of CaO to P2O5) for osteogenesis, and
the new formulas may be resorbed more quickly, with faster bone
replacement. Copper or silver in these glasses may also enhance
soft tissue deposition in other applications. Powders, fibers, or
foams of the bioactive glasses may be used as scaffolds for use in
the rapid replacement of bone or soft tissue. Scaffolds of bioactive glass are used for osteoconduction, and they may also initiate
the development of cartilage (chondrogenesis). The latter could be
useful for temporomandibular joint (TMJ) treatments. Combinations of biodegradable polymers with bioactive glass particles may
also enhance tissue replacement and serve as the basis for new
grafting materials.

CRITICAL QUESTION
In which ways does the use of smart materials lead to improvements in the
quality of oral health care?

Stimulus-Responsive “Smart” Materials
“Smart” materials are designed for interaction with external stimuli, such as light, temperature change, stress, moisture, pH, or
electric/magnetic fields. Examples of such dental materials include
zirconia ceramics that transform from a tetragonal to monoclinic
crystal form when tensile stress is induced at crack tips, leading
to an increase in crystal volume and compressive stress to prevent the propagation of cracks. Light-curing composites begin
curing when irradiated with particular wavelengths of blue light,
and others change color when irradiated (for use in orthodontics).
Glass-ionomer cements will weaken when desiccated, making
orthodontic bands easier to remove. Other glass-ionomer restoratives increase the release of fluoride when the pH in plaque fluid
decreases (becomes acidic). Nickel-titanium wires are designed
to soften when chilled below body temperature for bending and
threading through orthodontic brackets. Smart cements have been
envisioned to soften and allow debonding by a temperature change
or irradiation process for the removal of orthodontic devices, indirect restoratives, and some implant components.
Secondary caries and the unnecessary replacement of defective restorations can be prevented and adjacent enamel remineralized through one of the following preservative treatments: (1)
sealing of marginal crevices adjacent to defective restorations with

Emerging Technologies

405

a hydrophilic resin, (2) sealing crevices with a smart resin capable
of the controlled release of chlorhexidine or another antibacterial
agent, (3) sealing crevices with a smart resin capable of the controlled release of fluoride, and (4) applying a sealing resin or varnish that can release xylitol or other caries-management agents at
specified concentrations over a specific period of time. Emerging
technologies and materials for sealing may include smart hydrophilic resins that release fluoride and/or other mineralizing agents
when the pH of oral fluids decreases to a range of 4.0 to 5.5 to
seal moist microscopic crevices adjacent to defective restorations
and reduce enamel demineralization. Improved, smarter sealants,
varnishes, and composites that release fluoride would be beneficial. Concomitant studies of composition, particle size, and particle-size distribution for smarter release of fluoride (on-demand
release) would make them “smart sealants.” The rapid induction
or reversal of anesthesia may be another future application for
smart materials. For instance, particles or substances applied in
the sulcus could start or stop the anesthetic reaction. Smart material concepts can provide the clinician with better control, which
will certainly suggest approaches for new products.

Self-Assembling Materials
Self-assembling materials automatically construct prespecified
assemblies. Viruses, cells, tissues, and whole organisms are examples of biological self-assemblies, whereas crystals are an example
of nonbiological self-assemblies. The latter can be derived from
polymers, metals, ceramics, or combinations of components. Selfassembly occurs by orchestrated stages of initiation, propagation,
and termination. Control systems for initiation and/or propagation may be templates (e.g., template polymerization of proteins,
patterning of silica templates for electrical circuits), or they might
depend simply on natural rules corresponding to energetically
favorable physical, chemical, mechanical, and/or biological events
(e.g., capillary forces, heterogeneous nucleation of crystallization,
surface-energy reduction, phase separation, micelle formation,
and steric probabilities for molecular folding).
Bone or soft tissue scaffolding of graft materials can be considered as self-assembling. The coarse porous particulate or spongy
bone graft materials are designed to encourage biological tissue
to respond and replace the scaffold. Templates of proteins may be
used to encourage biological events, such as specific tissue growth.
For example, a broad class of self-assembling peptide derivatives
offers exciting novel therapies of broad potential impact in regenerative medicine. These peptide amphiphiles (PAs) incorporate
a short hydrophobic domain on one end of a hydrophilic oligopeptide sequence that also contains bioactive signaling sequences.
Nanostructures can be designed from these peptides through
self-assembly strategies and supramolecular chemistry, having
the potential to combine biocompatibility with bioactivity. Such
structures offer engineering design flexibility for biomedical and
biomaterials applications. This type of research is nearing clinical application. However, for the regeneration of teeth, translation
remains a distant but achievable target. Possibilities involve tissue
engineering, biomimetics, and stem cell biology, which are discussed in greater detail in the following sections.

Self-Healing (Self-Repairing) Materials
Self-healing is an autonomically initiated response to damage or
failure. Nature continually remodels bone, which can heal itself
(self-repair) even after a major fracture. Nature’s mechanisms of

406

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

repair have inspired efforts to develop self-healing capabilities in
synthetic materials that may well appear in dental products within
a few years. To achieve self-healing, a material must be capable of
identifying and repairing failures.
Restorative materials are subject to aging in vivo and have a
limited lifetime; they gradually degrade because of physical, chemical, and biological phenomena such as creep, fatigue, internal
stresses, dissolution, erosion, or biodegradation. An epoxy system
has been developed that is self-healing, consisting of microencapsulated dicyclopentadiene and Grubb’s metathesis catalyst. If a
crack occurs in the epoxy composite, some of the microcapsules
are ruptured near the crack and release dicyclopentadiene, which
subsequently fills the crack and reacts with the catalyst, causing
polymerization of the dicyclopentadiene and repairing the crack.
These materials improve the recovery of composite fracture toughness after stress in laboratory tests. Similar systems have exhibited
a significantly longer service life under mechanical stress in situ
compared with those without the ability for self-repair. A selfhealing dental resin would be extremely important for lengthening service life.

Biological Materials
Biomaterials science is exploring new technologies and is increasingly shifting to natural tissue repair or replacement therapies.
Biological biomaterials can lead to natural tissue restoration but
rely heavily on tissue engineering, biomimetics, self-assembling
systems, cell biology, and regenerative dentistry.

Biomimetics
Some biological mechanisms and processes (e.g., protein synthesis, silk and seashell formation) can be mimicked by synthesizing
similar products by artificial mechanisms. Of particular interest
here are those that involve self-assembly of components to form,
replace, or repair oral tissues. An intriguing prospect for this
approach is the use of self-assembling PAs that contain both a
photopolymerizable group and the arginine-glycine-aspartic acidserine (RGDS) cell-adhesion sequence. The self-assembling nature
of the PAs causes the formation of networks of prealigned nanofibers, mimicking natural fibers. These nanofibers can be formed
into tissue scaffolds as substrates for mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)
cultures. Topographical patterns produced from aligned PA nanofibers were found to promote the alignment of MSCs, which indicated that the cells sensed and responded to the nanoscale features
of the scaffold surfaces. The aligned MSCs then differentiated to
form bone-like tissue.
Biomimetic technologies are under intense investigation for
translation into clinically useful materials and treatments. These
and other biomimetic approaches and the use of tissue engineering scaffolds are discussed further in the sections headed “Tissue
Engineering” and “Regenerative Dentistry.”

Tissue Engineering
Tissue engineering has emerged in the past 30 years as a multidisciplinary field recognized by the National Institutes of Health
involving biology, medicine, and engineering. Experts hope that
tissue engineering will revolutionize health care and improve quality of life for people worldwide by maintaining, restoring, and
enhancing tissue and organ repair, regeneration, and function.
The main requirements for engineered tissues are the appropriate

levels and sequencing of regulatory signals, the presence of responsive progenitor cells, an appropriate extracellular matrix or carrier
construct (i.e., scaffold), and an adequate blood supply for oxygen
and nutrients. Either biological or synthetic polymers are used to
form the tissue engineering scaffolds. Recent advances in understanding growth factors and biodegradable polymer scaffolds have
made possible the successful tissue engineering of cartilage, bone,
and related tissues. Nakashiwa and Reddi (2003) have summarized the remaining achievements required to develop the clinical
techniques needed for the creation, substitution, and/or replacement of dental tissues. Among the many potential applications
are fracture repair, dentin and periodontal ligament replacement,
alveolar ridge augmentation, temporomandibular joint reconstruction, preosseointegration of dental implants, pulp regeneration, and partial or whole tooth regeneration.
Tooth loss is the most common organ failure. The regeneration
of a tooth can include not only regrowth of the entire tooth complex as a complete biological organ but also the regeneration of
individual components, including enamel, dentin, pulp, cementum, and periodontal tissues. Two lines of investigation deal with
restoration of partial tooth damage using tooth-related stem cells
for the repair or whole-tooth regeneration by using stem cells or
tissue-engineering techniques. The first successful bioengineering
of entire tooth structures was reported in 2002 using cells from
dissociated porcine third molar tooth buds seeded on biodegradable polymer scaffolds that were implanted in rat hosts for 20 to
30 weeks.
Osteonecrosis is a new and serious dental disease that arises
from receiving bisphosphonates intravenously or orally to treat
other medical conditions. Conventional debridement is ineffective in treating osteonecrosis, so biological solutions are being
developed to treat the condition and to prevent the onset of other
dental events, such as surgeries or extractions.
Chronic periodontitis is one of the most common oral diseases
worldwide, after caries. In periodontics, tissue-engineering strategies are being developed to serve as periodontal regenerative therapies for the restoration of lost alveolar bone, periodontal ligament,
and root cementum. These strategies are based on the growth of
new functional tissue rather than replacement of the periodontium. These studies have shown that regeneration is feasible for
small to moderate-sized periodontal defects using cell-scaffold
constructs for future clinical use. Yet even though tissue engineering has created the means for predictable and optimal periodontal
tissue regeneration, routine clinical periodontal regenerative medicine and clinical use remain in an early stage.
Still greater challenges are major bone reconstruction after
trauma or cancer and augmentation following implants. Formidable challenges exist for regenerating normal bone structure and
restoring the functionality of tooth-supporting tissues. Possibilities depend on an understanding of the cellular and molecular
mechanisms involved in periodontal tissue regeneration, the differentiation potential of stem cells, and the interactions among
stem cells, scaffolds, and host tissues. Intense research and development activities in these areas indicate that placing implants may
soon be possible, even under adverse anatomical or biological
circumstances. Tissue engineering may soon lead to the reconstruction of lost bone in bone deformities more effectively and
less traumatically than the traditional autogenous bone-transplantation approach.
Predicting the full impact of tissue engineering on the future
of dentistry is difficult. However, tissue engineering brings
together advances in disparate areas of materials science, genetics,

CHAPTER 20

molecular biology, and cell biology. Researchers in these disciplines may develop new alternatives for the regeneration of soft
tissues, bone, and enamel. An important consideration will be the
cost of these procedures, at least initially. Not only is the cost of
treatment important, but the costs are significant for such projects to develop the technology, demonstrate clinical efficacy, meet
regulatory requirements, commercialize the technology, and train
clinicians in these innovative techniques.

Delivery Systems for Biologicals
Tissue-engineering approaches that combine biomaterials with
biological materials, such as proteins (growth factors, etc.),
genes, and cells (both differentiated and stem cells), are promising routes to the therapies discussed previously. Thus biological materials are a source of active, ongoing research directed in
part toward developing competent scaffolding materials capable
of fulfilling application-specific requirements for biodegradation, biocompatibility, mechanical stability, biofunctionality,
and processability. The key attributes of any biological delivery
system are controlled, sustained, and targeted release of drugs
and bioactive factors. Each of these attributes is fundamentally
dependent on the ability to predictably generate a functionalized
material.
An example of a promising biological delivery strategy is to
increase osseointegration of titanium implants by coating them
to improve healing, induce peri-implant bone formation, and
enhance osteointegration. Coatings may include extracellular
matrix components, such as collagen, BMPs, or other proteins.
Further developments are required to orchestrate the release pattern, optimize the time that the active components remain bioactive, control degradation, optimize the extracellular matrix that
forms on the implant surfaces, and achieve maximum bone formation at minimal concentrations of the biological material.
A regenerative approach for diseased or necrotic pulp tissue
includes tissue removal and replacement with healthy tissue,
including melanocortin peptides (melanocyte-stimulating hormone, α-MSH), which possess antiinflammatory properties. A
nanostructured and functionalized multilayered film containing
α-MSH was reported for endodontic regeneration. Applied as
a gel or strip, MSH films were placed adjacent to the damaged
tooth to encourage the growth and regeneration of cells. In tests
performed on cavity-filled mice teeth, researchers saw extremely
positive results; after a month, the cavities had disappeared. This
technology is in its formative stages.
Many approaches may be viable for biological materials in dentistry, but several more years will be required before a version is
available for general use in dental practice.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why are engineered tooth roots more likely to have a greater impact on
dentistry than the engineered whole teeth now under development?

Regenerative Dentistry
Restorative dentistry is gradually transitioning toward biologically
driven repair, replacement, and regenerative medicine therapies
and away from replacement therapies using synthetic materials.
For tooth regeneration, the two major approaches are scaffolds
seeded with stem cells and stem cells without scaffolds. For these
approaches, the mouth has special advantages compared with

Emerging Technologies

407

other body locations, such as minimally invasive access and ease of
observation within the oral cavity.
Five dental stem cells have been isolated: (1) dental pulp stem
cells, (2) stem cells from exfoliated deciduous teeth (SHEDs), (3)
stem cells from apical papillae (SCAPs), (4) periodontal ligament
stem cells (PDLSCs), and (5) dental follicle progenitor cells. These
cells can differentiate into odontoblasts, adipocytes, neuron-like
cells, glial cells, osteoblasts, chondrocytes, melanocytes, myotubes,
and endothelial cells. Thus they will eventually be used to grow
replacement human teeth, but the signaling processes that control the development of discrete dental morphologies for incisors,
canines, premolars, and molars must be better understood before
whole-tooth regeneration will become a practical goal.
Instead, the repair and regeneration of dental tissues such as
dentin, pulp, periodontal ligaments, and whole root structures
offer possibilities for earlier realization than whole-tooth regeneration. The treatment tends toward either a cell-based or cellattraction mechanism. One example of this strategy is regenerative
endodontic treatment of infected, immature, permanent teeth
by Meschi and Lambrechts, who disinfected the root canal and
introduced stem cells, growth factors, and scaffolds. Another strategy using pulp tissue engineering and transplantation has been
applied in vitro to promote tissue regeneration. The cell-attraction
concept has been applied both in vitro and clinically and resulted
in recovery rather than regeneration of the pulp–dentin complex.
Long-term results are still lacking, and thus there is a need for
further clinical, microbial, and translational research.
Another step was taken toward regenerative endodontics
when pulp tissue was generated from the cells of human exfoliated deciduous teeth blended with nanofiber peptides as a scaffold material and injected into root canals. A similar approach
using the self-assembling PAs, discussed previously, as scaffolds
to encapsulate stem cells from deciduous teeth revealed that they
proliferate and secrete a soft collagen matrix. At this time, many
challenges remain; however, it is foreseeable that stem-cell/tissueengineering therapies will become available in the near term to
stimulate the pulp to deposit dentin and continue natural root
growth in noninfected, accidentally injured immature teeth.
Regeneration of the tooth root represents another feasible
near-term goal. This was demonstrated by transplanting a rootshaped calcium phosphate block loaded with swine SCAPs coated
with a resorbable gelatin containing PDLSCs. When this block
was placed into the extraction socket of a minipig lower incisor,
a root/periodontal structure was generated that was sufficient to
attach a ceramic crown. SCAPs are easily accessible because they
can be isolated from human third molars. The development of a
combination of SCAPs and PDLSCs encapsulated in a resorbable
scaffold offers a relatively near-term means of clinically inducing
the regeneration of a root form and connective tissue in alveolar
bone for the attachment of an artificial crown.
Both biomaterials and biological materials are playing an
indispensable role in the progress toward regeneration of a tooth
root, a crown, pulp, dentin, enamel, or an entire tooth. Repair
occurs by the use of metals, ceramics, or synthetic resin materials, whereas regeneration is controlled by biological processes.
Tooth regeneration is an extension of concepts in the broad field
of regenerative medicine to restore a tissue to its original form
and function by biological mechanisms. Although substantial
progress has been and is being made, whole-tooth regeneration
remains a distant but achievable goal—one that would cause dentistry to undergo a paradigm shift from repair and replacement
to regeneration.

408

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

CRITICAL QUESTION
In what ways do emerging diagnostic tests and processes improve the quality
of dental treatment?

Instruments and Processes
Diagnostic Devices and Techniques
As discussed in Chapter 15, Diagnostic Systems, various new and
evolving modern diagnostic techniques have been introduced for
caries, periodontal disease, oral cancer, herpes simplex infection,
and candidiasis, as well as for incipient fractures and trauma.
Promising technologies may produce images directly from the
patient or use saliva or other biological specimens from the patient
being treated. Diagnostic instruments have been based on radiographic, optical, laser fluorescence, ultrasound imaging, and electrical conductance technologies. A selected group of those that
appear to be the more promising in the near term are discussed in
the following sections.

Cone-Beam Computed Tomography
In dentistry, cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) provides
high-resolution, low-distortion, 3-D digital imaging of the hard
tissues of the head. Thus instead of pixels, the resolution is measured in voxels, and the images are often sharper than conventional CT images. The term cone-beam refers to the cone shape
of the x-ray beam used to create multiple thin slices instead of
the fan-shaped beam in conventional CT. CBCT produces Panorex and cephalometric projections, which become 3-D images
when the data are reformatted in a volume. The images that result
can be manipulated with the instrument’s visualization software
from any point of view (e.g., in the axial, coronal, sagittal, and
cross-sectional planes). Layers can be “peeled away” to show hidden underlying anatomical structures and defects. The slice thickness can be changed, and the structures can be tilted, zoomed,
and highlighted. These new views can drastically change treatment
decisions.
Swept-Source Optical Coherence Tomography
Swept-source optical coherence tomography (SS-OCT) is a
CBCT-related technology that uses infrared laser optics rather
than x-rays to generate high-resolution cross-sectional images of
microstructures in biological systems. This technology has been
under development for many years for various medical imaging
tasks, including examination of the oral cavity. Recent progress
indicates that a practical device may be available for dental applications within a few years. This nonionizing, real-time tomographic technology can detect structural flaws at a submicron scale
for dental diagnostic tasks. For example, SS-OCT may be used
to monitor the accuracy of composite restoration placement, the
development of polymerization contraction gaps, the detection of
vascular lesions, and the detection of occlusal caries.
Laser-Induced Fluorescence
Quantitative light-induced fluorescence (QLF; Inspektor Research
Systems, Amsterdam, Netherlands) is a well-advanced technology,
although it is not widely used in routine dental practice. QLF is a
simple yet effective technique that detects and quantifies de- and
remineralization of dental tissue and bacterial activity to reveal
lesions in teeth before they become frank lesions or cavities. The

QLF method is based on the autofluorescence of teeth and plaque
microorganisms. When teeth are illuminated with high-intensity
blue light, they fluoresce (re-emit) light in the green part of the
spectrum; less light correlates with less mineral content in the
enamel. Also, bacterial metabolic activity and plaque formation
can be detected because they produce porphyrin-type biological
pigments that fluoresce red light. This technique provides a measure of the degree of existing enamel demineralization via a small
video sensor. A digital image of each tooth is collected, which can
be analyzed for the amount of enamel loss. White spot lesions
(early dental caries) can be detected and quantified, as can bacterial metabolic activity on and in the teeth. When lesions are identified at an early stage, the teeth can repair themselves if good oral
hygiene practices are followed. This method also allows either the
dentist or oral hygienist to provide the patient with immediate
information and a direct incentive to monitor the quality of oral
care procedures. The newer QLF-D BiLuminator collects white
light and fluorescence images simultaneously to allow assessment of leaking restoration margins, secondary caries, occlusal
and interproximal caries, sealant integrity and cariogenic activity
under sealants, calculus, and gingivitis.

Laser Photothermal Radiometry
Laser photothermal radiometry (PTR) detects a small temperature
rise modulated by thermal infrared (black-body) radiation emitted from hard dental tissue after absorption of the laser light and
its nonradiative energy. In translucent materials such as enamel
and dentin, depth information is obtained following optical-tothermal energy conversion and transport of the incident laser
power in two modes: (1) the heat conductivity from a near-surface distance (50 to 500 μm), controlled by the thermal diffusivity of enamel and radiatively through black-body emissions from
several-millimeter depths, owing to optical penetration of the diffusely scattered laser-induced optical field; and (2) partial infrared transparency (infrared “spectral windows”) of the hard dental
tissue, which allows the thermal photons to exit the enamel and
register on the detector.
Two variations on this emerging nondestructive technology for
exploiting the opto-thermo-physical properties of teeth have been
reported. Both take advantage of the effects that changes in porosity and the crystalline status of enamel have on the thermal and
optical properties of hard tissues. As cariogenic demineralization
and formation of subsurface lesions grow, optical scattering and
absorption increase, whereas thermal conductivity and diffusivity
decrease. The two detection modalities are called infrared photothermal radiometry and modulated luminescence (PTR-LUM) and
thermo-photonic lock-in imaging (TPLI).
PTR-LUM (The Canary System, Quantum Dental Technologies, Inc., Toronto, Canada) scans a tooth with a low-power pulsating (modulated) laser light. The light is scattered, absorbed by
the tooth, and then re-emitted at a longer wavelength as luminescence, and heat is generated (<1 °C). Simultaneously, heat
(mid-infrared) and light (near-infrared) are measured to provide
information on the presence and extent of decay up to a depth of
a few millimeters below the surface.
TPLI uses a laser beam to illuminate the whole tooth and a
midinfrared camera in the lock-in mode to produce images at a
fixed frequency. TPLI is an extension of PTR into a full imaging modality. TPLI uses the same physical photothermal wave
principles as PTR: increased light scattering and absorption by a
carious lesion increase the thermal-wave amplitude and shift the
thermal-wave centroid closer to the surface, producing contrast

CHAPTER 20

between a carious lesion and intact enamel in both amplitude and
phase images. TPLI phase images are emissivity-normalized (just
as PTR phases are) and therefore are insensitive to the presence of
surface stains. Amplitude images provide integrated information
from deeper enamel regions because of the radiative contributions
that overlap conductive heat transfer. TPLI imaging is noncontacting and is reported to have a higher sensitivity to very early
demineralization than do dental radiographs.

Ultrasound Imaging
Better termed ultrasonography, this well-established medical diagnostic imaging technique has recently shown promise for highresolution imaging with enhanced specificity and sensitivity for the
early detection and monitoring of several oral pathologies. Ultrasonography is nonionizing and noninvasive, and with further development, handheld devices could become available for the detection
of cracks, calculi, and periapical lesions, in addition to enamel and
dentin demineralization caused by caries under and around existing restorations or on occlusal and interproximal surfaces.
Infrared Spectroscopy for Multiple Inflammatory
Parameters
An optical spectroscopy instrument is under development to
enhance the early detection and monitoring of peri-implant
inflammation and thereby reduce the number of implant failures.
The instrument uses visible, near-infrared spectroscopy to measure
alterations in regional tissue hemodynamics in periodontal tissue.
Tissue oxygenation at peri-implantitis sites is substantially reduced
compared with healthy sites because of increases in deoxyhemoglobin and decreases in oxyhemoglobin at the peri-implantitis
sites. To diagnose these changes, the instrument simultaneously
measures tissue oxygenation, total tissue hemoglobin, deoxyhemoglobin, oxygenated hemoglobin, and tissue edema.
Salivary Genetic Testing
Genetic testing using saliva is a molecular biology–based analytical
test particularly apropos for periodontal disease and oral cancer.
Chairside salivary sampling can be analyzed by companies such
as OralDNA Labs (Brentwood, TN) to identify patients who are
genetically susceptible to periodontal disease. This genetic testing
for the interleukin-1 (IL-1) gene cluster, a significant inflammatory mediator, complements other periodontal screening procedures and salivary bacterial DNA tests for specific oral pathogens.
Saliva analysis is used to screen for oral human papillomavirus
(HPV), especially the variants HPV-16 and HPV-18, as potential etiological agents in the development of squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Diagnostic testing will continue to
expand and enhance treatment modalities. Such tests can enhance
patients’ acceptance of treatment plans and improve their cooperation with the clinician to improve periodontal health.
Liquid-Based Cytology
Liquid-based cytology is a relatively new screening technique
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for
oral infections. It relies on the minimally invasive collection of
transepithelial mucosal cells and other microbiological aspects for
processing and evaluation. A clinician can request tests for several
generalized oral conditions, such as herpes simplex infection and
candidiasis, or suspicious areas of leukoplakia or erythroplakia
(OralCDx, CDx Laboratories, Suffern, NY). Cytology provides
the evidence needed to determine whether an immediate invasive
full-thickness biopsy procedure should be performed.

Emerging Technologies

409

Diagnostic technologies, such as CBCT, quantitative laser
fluorescence (QLF), and salivary genetic testing, are at hand and
growing. These and other techniques are expected to increase, with
positive benefits for both clinicians and patients. Each technique
varies with the mode of action and in its capability as a diagnostic
aid. Differences in presentation and behavior among anatomical
sites make it unlikely that any one diagnostic modality will have
adequate sensitivity and specificity for all circumstances. Thus a
combination of diagnostic tools will continue to be needed to reliably diagnose oral diseases and conditions and to provide corrective or preventive treatment at a stage where these treatments can
be most effective.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How does computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing
(CAD-CAM) production of dental prostheses differ from the processes
of stereolithography, robocasting, powder-bed ink-jet printing, and laser
scanning?

Computer-Driven Fabrication Systems
The present dental CAD-CAM systems vary dramatically in their
capabilities. Both copy milling and true CAD-CAM systems have
been developed. No equipment can acquire data directly in the
mouth, but intraoral sensors are used to acquire data. Not every
type of restoration can be created by CAD-CAM, although indications continue to expand. Both “additive” and “subtractive”
systems are available. Temporary crowns can be made in the lab
using either CAD or CAM systems. The additive systems use the
programmed buildup of a design from a resin that is cured “voxel
by voxel” to create the device. This requires resins that are cured
in special computer-controlled lab equipment with ultraviolet
light. Three-dimensional printing techniques have been developed for the formation of ceramic or resin composite restoratives
(see Chapter 15, Prototyping Tools). Three-dimensional printing
techniques will continue to grow and use enhanced dental materials, especially for fixed prosthodontics. The 3-D printing techniques are beginning to be used to fabricate the metal framework
of dental crowns and bridges. More advanced dental applications
include the creation of bone-graft scaffolds. Those developed to
date are summarized in Figure 20-2. See Chapter 15 for a full
discussion of these technologies.
Ceramic crowns, metal crowns, and metal superstructures
(overdenture bars) have been made using the subtractive (machining) CAD-CAM method using blocks of zirconia, leucitecontaining porcelain, filled resins, cobalt-chromium alloy, and
titanium. Refinements and esthetic improvements are expected
for all of the present systems.
Another emerging area is 3-D bioprinting. In 2019, Grigoryan
et al. demonstrated the creation of blood-vessel networks and
organ-like topologies using biocompatible hydrogels with tartrazine, a yellow food color additive projection stereolithography.
The technique involves polymerizing material using blue light,
one thin layer at a time. To make the technique work, the light
must be confined to a single layer so that it does not penetrate to
previous layers and polymerize them in off-target geometries. Tartrazine absorbs blue light selectively so that intertwined vascular
networks rapidly form in highly defined geometries.
These emerging technologies will dramatically expand the
capabilities for 3-D printing, but they will also require a different
set of dental and laboratory technical training skills.

410

PA RT V

Assessing Dental Restorations

TECHNIQUE

Stereolithography

Laser sintering

Powder-bed ink-jet
printing

MATERIALS

1 70 m

Photopolymers

45 100 m

Metals
Polymers

350 500 m

Ceramics
Metals
Polymers

200 400 m

Biopolymers
Some metals
Food

260 700 m

Thermoplastics

Laser

Laser cures
photopolymer
as platform lowers
into liquid vat.

Laser melts powder
rolled onto platform.
Platform lowers with
each layer printed.

SMALLEST
PRINTABLE
FEATURE

Laser
Roller

Roller

Printhead

Printhead sprays liquid
binder onto powder to fuse
layers. Platform lowers with
each layer printed.

Syringe

Robocasting
Syringes extrude fluid
materials that harden
on lowering platform.

Fused deposition
modeling
Heated extruder melts
plastic filament, which
cools on lowering platform.

Filament
Extruder

• Figure 20-2 The technologies available for three-dimensional printing. A variety of techniques can use
various materials to build solid objects with different resolutions. The arrows indicate the direction of roller
and platform movement. (Adapted from Butscher A, Bohner M, Hofmann S, et al: Structural and material approaches to bone tissue engineering in powder-based three-dimensional printing, Acta Biomater
7:907–920, 2011.)

Summary
This chapter has focused on technologies that are in the early stages
of implementation and those that have not yet passed the proofof-concept stage shown in the “level of evidence” section of Figure
20-1. Technologies that promote 3-D remineralization are needed
by practicing dentists whose focus is on disease prevention, minimally invasive procedures, and improved methods for extending
the survivability of restorations. Dentists, educators, and researchers will continue their search for improved technologies that
detect early stages of lesion development. Improved monitoring
of early carious lesions is essential to judge whether new methods
and materials of disease management ensure remineralization to
avoid surgical intervention. If successful, these technologies and
diagnostic methods would satisfy the “proven technologies, materials, and devices” outcome of Figure 20-1.

Several innovative methods for prosthesis construction in lab
settings have already emerged, and others are emerging. Technology improvements related to oral and maxillofacial reconstruction
methods will continue to offer pathways to improve oral health
care. Meanwhile, the search will continue for biological technologies that may allow “natural or organic” regeneration of lost or
diseased tissues.
This chapter may serve as a platform from which further
innovative technologies for oral and maxillofacial applications
can evolve with the research of materials scientists, chemists, implantologists, molecular biologists, cell biologists, and
geneticists. Sustained collaboration among researchers and clinicians is essential to expedite the development, evaluation,
and adoption of new technologies for improving oral health
outcomes.

CHAPTER 20

Selected Readings
Clough BH, Ylostalo J, Browder E, et al: Theobromine upregulates osteogenesis by human mesenchymal stem cells in vitro and accelerates
bone development in rats, Calcif Tissue Int 100:298–310, 2017.
de Josselin de Jong E, Higham SM, Smith PW, et al: Quantified lightinduced fluorescence, review of a diagnostic tool in prevention of oral
disease, J Appl Phys 105: 102031(1–7), 2009.
Devi KB, Sheela NV, Prasad BSK: Biosmart materials: A review, IOSRJDMS 18:37–41, 2019.
Fischer H: Self-repairing material systems—a dream or a reality? Nat Sci
2:873–901, 2010.
This review is an analysis of the underlying functional and constructional principles of existing natural and synthetic self-healing systems
spanning a range of classes of materials; it leads to general rules and
principles for the design of new and application-tailored self-healing
material systems.
Fugolin APP, Pfeifer CS: New resins for dental composites, J Dent Res
96:1085–1091, 2017.
Grigoryan B, Paulsen SJ, Corbett DC, et al: Multivascular networks and
functional intravascular topologies within biocompatible hydrogels,”
Science 364:458–464, 2019.
Li L, Pan H, Tao J, et al: Repair of enamel by using hydroxyapatite nanoparticles as the building blocks, J Mater Chem 18:4079–4084, 2008.
Makade C, Tekam D, Kokane V, et al: A review on integrating contemporary trends of caries diagnostic tools, Central Indian J Den Sci
7:21–27, 2016.

Emerging Technologies

411

This article reviews technologies that aid in detecting dental caries
at the earliest stages, including LED light that captures the resulting reflection and refraction of the light in the tooth, enhanced standard image processing techniques, use of three-dimensional images in
viewing internal structure, and use of infrared photon and coherent
back-scattered light techniques.
Saunders SA: Current practicality of nanotechnology in dentistry. Part
1: Focus on nanocomposite restoratives and biomimetics, Clin Cosm
Invest Dent 1:47–61, 2009.
This review discusses the current clinical utility of nanotechnology’s
most tangible contribution to dentistry to date: the restoration of
tooth structure with nanocomposites. Characterized by filler-particle sizes of less than 100 nm, these materials can offer esthetic and
strength advantages over conventional microfilled and hybrid resinbased composite (RBC) systems, primarily in terms of smoothness,
polishability and precision of shade characterization, plus flexural
strength and microhardness similar to those of the better-performing
posterior RBCs. Available comparative data for nanocomposites and
organically.
Walsh RM, Woodmansey KF, He J, et al: Histology of NeoMTA Plus and
Quick-Set2 in contact with pulp and periradicular tissues in a canine
model, J Endod 44:1389–1395, 2018.
Full Selected Readings for this chapter can be found on www.expertconsult.com.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Useful Websites (Accessed May 2020)
Library of critically appraised topics related to clinical dental problems
(https://cats.uthscsa.edu/). The “CAT” library provides key word–
searchable topics. Each topic is presented as a structured one-page
summary and critique of the best available evidence on a focused
question. The library is designed as a rapidly accessible source of evidence-based information for use in making clinical dental decisions.
The Eco-Dentistry Association: http://www.ecodentistry.org/?page=
AboutGreenDentistry.
Information about the association and resources to develop “green”
dental practices.
Dental Restorative Materials—A Pollution Prevention Perspective:
http://wsppn.org/studies/dental-chemical-use/fact-sheets/restorativematerials/.
Information regarding the health, safety, and environmental issues
arising from the chemical ingredients used in dental restorative materials.
The Canary System—A PTR-LUM Diagnostic Instrument. https://www
.dentistrytoday.com/technology/9589-improving-the-way-to-detect
-cracks-in-teeth.
Publications
Abiodun-Solanke IMF, Ajayi DM, Arigbede AO: Nanotechnology and its
Application in Dentistry, Ann Med Health Sci Res 4(Suppl 3):S171–
S177, 2014. doi:10.4103/2141-9248.141951.
Nanotechnology, or nanoscience, refers to research and development
of an applied science at the atomic or molecular level [i.e., molecular engineering, manufacturing). The growing interest in the dental
applications of nanotechnology is leading to the emergence of a new
field called nanodentistry.
Artzi Z, Kozlovsky A, Nemcovsky CE, et al: Histomorphometric evaluation of natural mineral combined with a synthetic cell-binding peptide (P-15) in critical-size defects in the rat calvaria, Int J Oral Max
Impl 23:1063–1070, 2008.
Bayne SC: Beginnings of the dental composite revolution, J Am Dent Assoc
144:880–884, 2013. DOI.org/10.14219/jada.archive.2013.0205.
Besinis A, De Peralta T, Handy RD: The antibacterial effects of silver, titanium dioxide and silica dioxide nanoparticles compared to the dental
disinfectant chlorhexidine on Streptococcus mutans using a suite of
bioassays, Nanotoxicology 8:1–16, 2014.
Chen FM, Jin Y: Periodontal tissue engineering and regeneration: Current approaches and expanding opportunities, Tissue Eng Part B Rev
16:219–255, 2009.
Chen FM, Sun H-H, Lu H, et al: Stem cell-delivery therapeutics for
periodontal tissue regeneration, Biomaterials 27:6320–6344, 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.05.048.
Clough BH, Ylostalo J, Browder E, et al: Theobromine upregulates osteogenesis by human mesenchymal stem cells in vitro and accelerates
bone development in rats, Calcif Tissue Int 100:298–310, 2017.
Darvell BW, Wu RCT: “MTA”—an hydraulic silicate cement: review
update and setting reaction, Dent Mater 27:407–422, 2011.
de Josselin de Jong E, Higham SM, Smith PW, et al: Quantified lightinduced fluorescence, review of a diagnostic tool in prevention of oral
disease, J Appl Phys 105:1–7, 2009.
Devi KB, Sheela NV, Prasad BSK: Biosmart materials: A review, IOSRJDMS 18:37–41. 2019. doi:10.9790/0853-1801093741.
Donly KJ, Gomez C: In vitro de/remineralization of enamel caries at restoration margins utilizing fluoride releasing composite resin, Quintessence Int 25:355–358, 1994.
Fan C, Chu L, Rawls HR, et al: Development of an antimicrobial resin—
a pilot study, Dent Mater 27:322–328, 2011.
Fan Y, Sun Z, Wang R, et al: Enamel inspired nanocomposite fabrication
through amelogenin supramolecular assembly, Biomaterials 28:3034–
3042, 2007.
Fioretti F, Mendoza-Palomares C, Helms M, et al: Nanostructured assemblies for dental applications, ACS Nano 4:3277–3287, 2010.

Fischer H: Self-repairing material systems—a dream or a reality? Nat Sci
2:873–901, 2010.
This review is an analysis of the underlying functional and constructional principles of existing natural and synthetic self-healing systems
spanning a range of classes of materials; it leads to general rules and
principles for the design of new and application-tailored self-healing
material systems.
Freitas RA Jr: Nanodentistry, J Am Dent Assoc 131:1559–1565, 2000.
Fugolin APP, Pfeifer CS: New resins for dental composites, J Dent Res
96:1085–1091, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022034517720658.
Galler KM, D’Souza RN, Hartgerink JD: Biomaterials and their potential applications for dental tissue engineering, J Mater Chem 20:8730–
8746, 2010.
A brief description is provided of oral anatomy and pathology, stateof-the-art treatment methods and their shortcomings, together with
an overview of current strategies to fabricate bioactive matrices, with
an emphasis on nanostructured materials. Design principles are suggested for scaffolding systems specifically tailored toward dental tissue
regeneration. Future approaches are envisioned based on the emerging
areas that rely on recent developments in tissue engineering and stem
cell research.
Garcia I, Tabak LA: A view of the future: Dentistry and oral health in
America, J Am Dent Assoc 140(Suppl 1):44S–48S, 2009.
Gelhard TB, Arends J: Microradiography of in vivo remineralized lesions
in human enamel. II, J Biol Buccale 12:59–65, 1984.
Ghorayeb SR, Bertoncini CA, Hinders MK: Dental ultrasonography,
IEEE T Ultrason FERR 55:1256–1266, 2008.
Grigoryan B, Paulsen SJ, Corbett DC, et al: Multivascular networks and
functional intravascular topologies within biocompatible hydrogels,
Science 364:458–464, 2019.
Grumezescu AM, editor: Nanobiomaterials in Dentistry: Applications of
Nanobiomaterials, Vol: 11, Cambridge, MA, 2016, William Andrew.
ISBN 978-0-323-42867-5.
This book discusses synthesis methods and novel technologies involving nanostructured bioactive materials with applications in dentistry.
This book provides current research results for dental materials science.
Hellen A, Mandelis A, Finer Y, et al: Quantitative evaluation of the kinetics of human enamel simulated caries using photothermal radiometry
and modulated luminescence, J Biomed Opt 16:1–13, 2011.
This paper evaluates PTR-LUM, an emerging nondestructive technology, for its potential use for the characterization and quantification of
early caries.
Hendricks MP, Sato K, Palmer LC, et al: Supramolecular assembly of
peptide amphiphiles, Acc Chem Res 50:2440–2448, 2017.
Hinders M, Bertoncini C, Ghoryeb S: Ultrasonographic detection of
tooth flaws, Rev Prog Quant Nondestr Eval 29:1559–1565, 2010.
Hollister SJ, Murphy WL: Scaffold translation: Barriers between concept
and clinic, Tissue Eng Part B Rev 17:459–474, 2011.
This article reviews the technical, business, and philosophical barriers
to the translation of scaffold-based bone tissue engineering therapies
to clinical use. Enabling translation to clinical application requires
both understanding the challenges and addressing the complete range
of these challenges. Engineering scaffold designs as modular systems with a sliding scale of complexity is envisioned as an achievable
approach for addressing the translational challenges.
Holten-Andersen N, Harrington MJ, Birkedal H, et al: PH-induced
metal-ligand cross-links inspired by mussel yield self-healing polymer
networks with near-covalent elastic moduli, PNAS 108:2651–2655,
2011.
Huang G, Yamaza T, Shea LD: Stem/progenitor cell-mediated de
novo regeneration of dental pulp with newly deposited continuous
layer of dentin in an in vivo model, Tissue Eng Part A 16:605–615,
2009.
Hubbell JA: Materials as morphogenetic guides in tissue engineering,
Curr Opin Biotechnol 14:551–558, 2003.
Keller L, Offner D, Schwinté P, et al: Active nanomaterials to meet the
challenge of dental pulp regeneration, Materials 8:7461–7471, 2015.
400.e1

Jandt KD, Sigusch BW: Future perspectives of resin-based dental materials, Dent Mater 25:1001–1006, 2009.
This outlook paper gives a view of selected potential future developments in the area of resin-based biomaterials with an emphasis on
dental composites. A discussion of potential developments provides
insights into future performance and application possibilities for these
materials.
Jefferies SR, Pameijer CH, Appleby DC, et al: Prospective observation of
a new bioactive luting cement: 2-Year follow-up, J Prosthodon 21:33–
41, 2012.
Jones AS, Rule JD, Moore JS, et al: Life extension of self-healing polymers with rapidly growing fatigue cracks, J R Soc Interface 4:395–403,
2007.
Ko H-Y, Kang S-M, Kim HE, et al: Validation of quantitative lightinduced fluorescence-digital (QLF-D) for the detection of approximal
caries in vitro, J Dent 45:568–575, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.jdent.2015.02.010.
Le Guéhennec L, Soueidan A, Layrolle P: Surface treatments of titanium
dental implants for rapid osseointegration, Dent Mater 23:844–854,
2007.
Li L, Pan H, Tao J, et al: Repair of enamel by using hydroxyapatite
nanoparticles as the building blocks, J Mater Chem 18:4079–4084,
2008.
Lippert F, Parker DM, Jandt KD: In situ remineralisation of surface softened human enamel studied with AFM nanoindentation, Surf Sci
553:105–114, 2004.
Liu Y, Ramanath HS, Wang DA: Tendon tissue engineering using scaffold enhancing strategies, Trends Biotechnol 26:201–209, 2008.
Kasraei S, Shokri A, Poorolajal J, et al: Comparison of cone-beam computed tomography and intraoral radiography in detection of recurrent caries under composite restorations, Braz Dent J 28:85–91, 2017.
https://doi.org/10.1590/0103-6440201701248.
Makade C, Tekam D, Kokane V, et al: A review on integrating contemporary trends of caries diagnostic tools, Central Indian J Den Sci
7:21–27, 2016.
This article reviews technologies that aid in detecting dental caries
at the earliest stages, including LED light that captures the resulting reflection and refraction of the light in the tooth, enhanced standard image processing techniques, use of three-dimensional images in
viewing internal structure, and use of infrared photon and coherent
back-scattered light techniques.
McCabe JF, Yan Z, Al Naimi OT, et al: Smart materials in dentistry—
future prospects, Dent Mater J 28:37–43, 2009.
Smart materials have properties that can be altered in a controlled
fashion by, for example, stress, temperature, moisture, pH, and electric
or magnetic fields. A key feature of smart behavior includes an ability
to return to the original state after the stimulus has been removed.
McGlennen RC: Salivary diagnostics: A catalyst for medical/dental collaboration, Comp Cont Educ Dent 32:96, 2011.
Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, Curtis JW, Ergle JW, et al: Ultraconservative and
cariostatic sealed restorations: Results at year 10, J Am Dent Assoc
129:55–66, 1998.
A classic study that demonstrated how effectively a sealing resin can
penetrate defective margin gaps between either amalgam or composite
restorations placed over carious dentin and prevent the progression of
lesions.
Nakahara T, Ide Y: Tooth regeneration: Implications for the use of bioengineered organs in first-wave organ replacement, Hum Cell 20:63–70,
2007.
Nakashiwa M, Reddi H: The application of bone morphogenic proteins
to dental tissue engineering, Nature Biotech 21:1025–1032, 2003.
An overview of the current and potential uses of tissue engineering in
dentistry and the role of bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs).
Nogueira-Filho G, Xiang XM, Shibli JA, et al: On site noninvasive assessment of peri-implant inflammation by optical spectroscopy, J Periodont Res 46:382–388, 2011.
Nör JE: Tooth regeneration in operative dentistry, Oper Dent 31:633–
642, 2006.
400.e2

Oei JD, Zhao WW, Chu L, et al: Antimicrobial acrylic materials with
in situ generated silver nanoparticles, J Biomed Mater Res Part B
100B:409–415, 2012.
Resin biomaterials are described that can help prevent such problems
as secondary caries and implant infections.
Otis LL, Everett MJ, Sathyam US, et al: Optical coherence tomography:
A new imaging technology for dentistry, J Am Dent Assoc 131:511–
514, 2000.
Padhye A, Ungewiss C, Fradette JJ, et al: A novel ex vivo tumor system
identifies SRC-mediated invasion and metastasis in mesenchymal
tumor cells in non-small cell lung cancer, Sci Rep 9:1–13, 2019.
Padovani GC, Feitosa VP, Sauro S, et al: Advances in dental materials
through nanotechnology: Facts, perspectives and toxicological aspects,
Trends Biotechno 33:621–636, 2015.
Palmer LC, Newcomb CJ, Kaltz SR, et al: Biomimetic systems for
hydroxyapatite mineralization inspired by bone and enamel, Chem
Rev 108:4754–4783, 2008.
Park CH, Rios HF, Jin Q, et al: Biomimetic hybrid scaffolds for engineering human tooth–ligament interfaces, Biomaterials 31:5945–5952,
2010.
Park YS, Ahn JS, Kwon HB, et al: Current status of dental caries diagnosis
using cone beam computed tomography, Imaging Sci Dent 41(2):43–
51, 2011. https://doi.org/10.5624/isd.2011.41.2.43.
Petrovic LM, Drobac MR, Stojanac IL, et al: A method of improving
marginal adaptation by elimination of singular stress point in composite restorations during resin photo-polymerization, Dent Mater
26:449–455, 2010.
Petrovic V, Stefanovic V: Dental tissue—new source for stem cells, Sci
World J 9:1167–1177, 2009.
A review focusing on recent findings in the field of dental stem cell
research and the potential for their therapeutic use.
Pramanik C, Wang T, Ghoshal S, et al: Microfibrous borate bioactive
glass dressing sequesters bone-bound bisphosphonate in the presence
of simulated body fluid, J Mater Chem B 3:959–963, 2015.
Qi Y-P, Li N, Niu L-N, et al: Remineralization of artificial dentinal caries
lesions by biomimetically modified mineral trioxide aggregate, Acta
Biomater 8:836–842, 2012.
Rhienmora P, Haddawy P, Suebnukarn S, et al: Intelligent dental training
simulator with objective skill assessment and feedback, Artif Intell Med
52:115–121, 2011. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.artmed.2011.04.003.
A virtual reality dental training simulator is described together with
methods for providing objective skill assessment and feedback. The
simulator uses force feedback and can classify a particular operator
as novice-level or expert-level and generate.
Rosa V, Della Bona A, Cavalcanti BN, et al: Tissue engineering: From
research to dental clinics, Dent Mater 28:341–348, 2012. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2011.11.025.
This review presents the principles underlying tissue engineering and
the current challenges, perspectives, trends, and future applications of
tissue engineering in dentistry.
Rugh JD, Hendricson WD, Glass BJ: Teaching evidence-based practice
at the University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio Dental
School, Tex Dent J 128:187–190, 2011.
The previous two articles describe the development and use of an
online library of critically appraised topics, or “CATs,” that present one-page summaries and critiques of the best available evidence
on focused clinical questions. It provides an immediately available
source for making evidence-based clinical dental decisions (http://cats
.uthscsa.edu/).
Rugh JD, Hendricson WD, Hatch JP, et al: The San Antonio CATs initiative, J Am Coll Dent 77:16–21, 2010.
Saunders SA: Current practicality of nanotechnology in dentistry. Part
1: Focus on nanocomposite restoratives and biomimetics, Clin Cosm
Invest Dent 1:47–61, 2009.
This review discusses the current clinical utility of nanotechnology’s
most tangible contribution to dentistry to date: The restoration of
tooth structure with nanocomposites. Characterized by filler-particle
sizes of less than 100 nm, these materials can offer esthetic and

strength advantages over conventional microfilled and hybrid resinbased composite (RBC) systems, primarily in terms of smoothness,
polishability, and precision of shade characterization, plus flexural
strength and microhardness similar to those of the better-performing
posterior RBCs. Available comparative data for nanocomposites and
organically.
Scheifele C, Schmidt-Westhausen A-M, Dietrich T, et al: The sensitivity
and specificity of the OralCDx technique: Evaluation of 103 cases,
Oral Oncol 40:824–828, 2004.
Seeman NC: Nanotechnology and the double helix, Sci Am 290:92–99,
2004.
Shimada Y, Sadr A, Burrow MF, et al: Validation of swept-source optical
coherence tomography (SS-OCT) for the diagnosis of occlusal caries,
J Dent 38:655–665, 2010.
Slavkin HC, Bartold PM: Challenges and potential in tissue engineering,
Periodontol 41:9–15, 2006.
Sloan AJ, Smith AJ: Stem cells and the dental pulp: Potential roles in
dentine regeneration and repair, Oral Dis 13:151–157, 2007.
This article explores tissue engineering alternatives for pulp-capping
and root canal treatment using dental pulp progenitor/stem cells,
morphogens, and biomaterial scaffolds. The potential of this approach
as a clinical therapy is discussed and shown to require close control of
the regenerative process, because uncontrolled regeneration can inadvertently lead to pulp obliteration and loss of tooth vitality.
Sonoyama W, Liu Y, Fang D, et al: Mesenchymal stem cell-mediated
functional tooth regeneration in swine, PLoS One 1:1–8, 2006.
Steinkeller MD, Salzman N, Weiss EI: In-vivo performance of antibacterial flowable composite, IADR, 2019 Abst.0507.
Subramani K, Ahmed W: Emerging Nanotechnologies in Dentistry, St.
Louis, MO, 2012, Elsevier.
This book brings together an international team of experts from the
fields of nanomaterials, biomedical engineering, and dentistry to cover
the new materials and techniques with potential for intra- or extraoral
use in the restoration, fixation, replacement, or regeneration of hard
and soft tissues in and about the oral cavity and craniofacial region.
New dental nanotechnologies include the use of advanced inorganic
and organic materials, smart and biomimetic materials, tissue engineering, and drug delivery strategies.
Tabatabaei N, Mandelis A, Amaechi BT: Thermophotonic lock-in
imaging of early demineralized and carious lesions in human teeth,
J Biomed Opt 16:071402, 2011.
A novel dental-imaging modality, thermophotonic lock-in imaging
(TPLI), is described that uses photothermal wave technology and is
capable of detecting early carious lesions and cracks on occlusal and
approximal surfaces.
Tayalia P, Mooney DJ: Controlled growth factor delivery for tissue engineering, Adv Mater 21:3269–3285, 2009.
ten Cate JM, van Duinen RN: Hypermineralization of dentinal lesions
adjacent to glass-ionomer cement restorations, J Dent Res 74:1266–
1271, 1995.

Vorndran E, Klammert U, Ewald A, et al: Simultaneous immobilization
of bioactives during 3D powder printing of bioceramic drug-release
matrices, Adv Funct Mater 20:1585–1591, 2010.
The combination of a degradable bioceramic scaffold and a drug delivery system in a single low temperature fabrication step is described
for the reconstruction of bone defects. The production of calcium
phosphate scaffolds by a multijet 3D printing system enables localized deposition of biologically active drugs and proteins with a spatial
resolution of approximately 300 μm.
Walsh RM, Woodmansey KF, He J, et al: Histology of NeoMTA Plus and
Quick-Set2 in contact with pulp and periradicular tissues in a canine
model, J Endod 44:1389–1395, 2018.
Webber MJ, Kessler JA, Stupp SI: Emerging peptide nanomedicine to
regenerate tissues and organs, J Intern Med 267:71–88, 2010. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2009.02184/x.
The authors review their work on peptide nanostructures containing
bioactive signals. These amphiphilic molecules are designed to selfassemble into biocompatible, bioactive biomaterials with the potential
for use as novel therapies in a wide variety of regenerative medicine
applications, including the repair of bone, dentin, and enamel and the
regeneration of whole teeth.
Welch K, Cai Y, Engqvist H, et al: Dental adhesives with bioactive and
on-demand bactericidal properties, Dent Mater 26:491–499, 2010.
ISSN 0109-5641, doi:10.1016/j.dental.2010.01.008.
Wolf LF: Personal manufacturing, Chem Eng News 89:10–14, 2010.
A review of CAD/CAM technologies and how they are being used for
on-demand manufacturing of everything from medical devices such
as those used in dentistry to food and consumer products.
Yildirim S, Fu SY, Kim K, et al: Tooth regeneration: A revolution in
stomatology and evolution in regenerative medicine, Int J Oral Sci
3:107–116, 2011.
This review article explores existing and visionary approaches to tooth
regeneration that represent a paradigm shift from repair by synthetic
materials to regeneration by biological restoration to restore original
form and function by biological substitutes.
Young CS, Terada S, Vacanti JP, et al: Tissue engineering of complex
tooth structures on biodegradable polymer scaffolds, J Dent Res
81:695–700, 2002.
Yuan ZL, Nie HM, Wang S, et al: Biomaterial selection for tooth regeneration, Tissue Eng B-Rev 17:373–388, 2011.
A critical review of current knowledge of biomaterial use in tooth
regeneration is presented. The selection of native and/or synthetic
polymers, three-dimensional scaffold fabrication, stem cell transplantation, and stem cell homing is discussed.
Zivkovic P, Petrovic V, Najman S, et al: Stem cell–based dental tissue
engineering, Sci World J: TSW Dev Embryol 10:901–916, 2010.
This review focuses on the use of tissue engineering strategies in tooth
regeneration using stem cells and stem cells/scaffold constructs. The
authors point out that although whole tooth regeneration is still not
possible, there are promising results.

400.e3

Index
Page numbers followed by “f ” indicate figures, “t” indicate tables, and “b” indicate boxes.
A
Abfraction, 7
Abrasion, 7, 334, 334f
air-particle, 344, 348–349
three-body, 334f
two-body, 334f
Abrasive
blinding, 342
bonded, 340–341
coated discs and strips, 342f
definition, 332
hardness values, 339t
instruments, 42, 338
design, 341
metal bonds, 342
modes of wear, 334f
motion, 335
nonbonded, 343
partial denture framework casting, 333f
particle sizes, 339t
pastes, 344
procedures and instruments, 333f
process, 333
resinoid-bonded, 342
types, 333f, 340
Abrasive wear
factors influencing, 81
three-body, 81
two-body, 81
Abrasiveness, dentifrices, 351
Absorption, 53
definition, 49
Abutment screw, 269
Abutment–prosthesis interfaces, 137f
Accelerated lifetime testing (ALT)
constant-stress/step-stress accelerated
lifetime testing (CSALT/SSALT), 383
definition, 381
lifetime predictions, 383
performance of dental materials, 383
regression model, 383f
stressor, 383
Acceleration, 4
Accelerator, 277
Acceptability, clinical analysis, 392
Acceptability threshold (AT), 54
Accuracy, 381, 384
Acetylene, heat source, 186
Acid–base reaction, 128
Acid-etch technique, 116
Acid-etching
dentin, 117
discovery, 115
enamel, 117
Acidulated phosphate fluoride (APF) gels, 203
usage, 134

Acrylic resins, 88, 233, 234f
ACTIVA BioACTIVE, 104
Activation, 87
Activator, definition, 87
ADA Specifications and Acceptance Program,
387
Addition polymerization, 39
chain transfer, 40, 41f
inhibition, 40
unsaturated functional groups, 39f
vinyl monomers, 39
Addition polymers, 38
Addition silicone, 277, 278f
advantage, 278
composition, 289
contamination, 277
polymerization, 277, 278f
Addition-fragmentation monomer (AFM),
403
Additive manufacturing (AM), 328
definition, 326
fused deposition modeling, 330
materials, 330
stereolithography, 330
Additives, 300
Adherend, 43
definition, 15
Adhesion, 42, 115
definition, 15
mechanisms, 116
Adhesive bonding, 47
Adhesive wear, 80
Adhesives, 43, 121
classification, 122f
definition, 15
etch-and-rinse, 123
self-etch, 123
Adjacent teeth (restoration), endosteal blade
implant designs (usage), 256f
Adverse effects of material, 355–356. See also
Allergies; Local effects;
Systemic effects
Aerosols, 338
Agar
composition, 289
gelation, 289
impression making, 289, 289f
sol–gel transformation, 287
Age-hardening, 176
definition, 171
heat treatment, 32
Air pockets, formation, 47f
Air-particle abrasion, 332, 344, 348
Alginate impression material
composition, 290
compressive strength, 292, 298t

Alginate impression material (Continued)
gelation process, 290
impression making, 292
powder composition, 293t
preparation, 291
setting time, 291, 291f
shelf life, 292
sodium, 291f
strength, 292
Alginate substitutes, 278
All-ceramic crowns
aesthetics, 228
strengthening, thermal expansion
mismatch, 225
stress concentrations, 223
All-ceramic prostheses
contraindications, 228
fractography, 398
fracture, factors associated, 398
All-ceramic restorations
aesthetic appearance, 228
fracture susceptibility, 226
All-ceramic systems, 206, 213, 214t
pressable core ceramics/veneering ceramics,
214t
veneering ceramic for, 218t
Allergic reactions
inflammatory response, 361, 362f
prosthetic polymers and resins, 248
Allergies
allergens, 360–361
concept, 356
contact dermatitis, 364
definition, 355
dental alloys
cobalt, 375
gold, 375
immunotoxicity of metal, 375
nickel allergy, 374
Ni-Pd cross-reactivity, 375
palladium allergy, 375
patch tests, 374
symptoms, 375
titanium and titanium alloys, 375
dental amalgams, 166, 371
frequencies, 360–361
Gell and Coombs classification, 360
hand dermatitis, 360
immunotoxicity, 362–363, 363f
inflammation, 361, 362f
methacrylates and resin composites, 373
natural rubber latex (NRL), 377
occupational hazards, 364
occurrence, 360
patch test, 362f, 362
respiratory problems, 364
413

414

Index

Allergies (Continued)
sensitization, 361
sites for reactions, 360f, 360
symptoms, 361f, 361
types, 360
All-metal prostheses
alloys, 174
base-metal, 176
gold-based alloys, 175
gold-copper alloys, 175
high-noble alloys, 175
composition, 175
noble alloys, 175
composition, 175
silver-palladium alloys, 176
titanium alloys, 176
Alloplastic, 253
definition, 253
Alloys, 15, 23
composition
copper percentage, 31
percent by weight, 264t
definition, 15
dental applications classification, 174,
174t
ductility, 173
elastic modulus, 172
eutectic alloys, 30
fatigue resistance, 173
gold-based, 175
gold-copper, 32f
hardness, 173
high palladium content, 33
mechanical properties, 172
classification, 174
noble metal content classification, 173,
173t
peritectic, 31
principal elements classification, 174
stainless steel, 194
temperature decrease, 29
Alpha-hemihydrate, 295
Alpha-omega-hydroxyl-terminated
poly-dimethyl siloxane, 277, 278f
Alpha-titanium alloys (deformation), twinning
(significance), 191
Alumina
core ceramic, 219
glass formation, 208
physical properties, 219t
Alumina core
ceramic, 219
dental, 219
Aluminosilicate, 328
Aluminous porcelain crowns, 206
Aluminum oxide, 111, 340
Amalgam, 153,
allergies, 371
biocompatibility, 371f, 370–372
bonding, 126
creep, 51
in dentistry, 42
environmental mercury exposure, 372
local reactions, 371f, 371
mercury handling, 372
mercury poisoning symptoms, 370
mercury release, 370
systemic reactions, 371

Amalgam alloy. See also Dental amalgams
amalgamation. See Amalgamation
bonding, 126
composition
commercial alloys, 154t
equilibrium-phase diagram, 155f
gallium-based alloys, 155
high-copper alloy, 155
low-copper alloys, 154
silver-tin system, 154, 155f
dental amalgam, 153
direct restoration, 8
disadvantages, 88
particle shapes, 153, 154f
powder configuration
atomized powder, 155
lathe-cut powder, 155
particle sizes, 155
vs. spherical powder, 155
programmable triturator, 153, 154f
restorations, 109f, 136
separators, 363
trituration capsules, 153, 154f
Amalgam tattoo, 371f, 371
Amalgamation
amalgam, 153
definition, 153
high-copper alloys
admixed alloys, 157
single-composition alloys, 157, 158f
low-copper alloys
development sequence, 156f, 156
microstructure features, 156, 157f
physical properties, 156
reaction products, 155, 156f
reaction process, 153
American National Standards Institute
(ANSI), 387
ADA Specification No. 96 (ISO 9917-1),
137
American National Standards Institute
(ANSI)/American Dental Association
(ADA) Specification No. 41, 364
American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM) F 67 unalloyed titanium,
tensile properties/impurity limits, 177t
Amorphous silica, 90, 97
Amorphous structure
atom, 20
polymers, 36
Animal tests, 366
Ankylosis, 253, 257
Annealing, 193
definition, 171
Anode, 59
Anodic/oxidation reaction, 59
Anodization, 262
Anterior teeth
active carious lesions, 7f
misaligned lower, 7f
wax-up, 10f
Antiflux, 185
definition, 171
Antimicrobial materials, 404
Apparent surface area, 80
Aqueous-based cements, 138
Argon gas atmosphere, laser welding, 188
Arkansas stone, 340

Aromatic urethane dimethacrylate (AUDMA),
403
Artificial implant designs/material, 254
As-cast Cu-Ag alloy, cored structure, 30
Asperities, 80
Asperity junctions, 80
Astropol finishing/polishing system, 344
Atomic model, 68f
Atoms, 16
interaction, 17, 17f
size difference, 28
Atraumatic restorative treatment (ART), 144
definition, 128
Atrophic mandibles (accommodation),
Branemark hybrid prosthesis (usage),
269
Attractive force, 17
Attrition, 7
Augmented reality (AR), 331
definition, 326
Austenite, 194
Austenitic stainless steels, 195
corrosion resistance, 195
mechanical properties, 195
Autoglazed veneer ceramic, 209f
Auxiliary dental material, 10
definition, 3, 276
B
Ba glass fillers, 90
Backbone, 34
Back-pressure porosity, 322, 323f
Ball-and-stick model, 20f
Base metal alloys, 181
definition, 171
hardness/strength, 181
manipulation, 181
mechanical properties, 182
removable partial dentures, alloys, 183
solidification shrinkage, 181
Base metals
all-metal prosthesis usage, 176
dental alloys, 176
Base paste (base putty), 275, 277
Baseplate wax, 275, 302–303
Benzoyl peroxide (BPO)
activation, 39f
Beta-hemihydrate, 295
Beta-titanium alloys, 199
Beta-titanium wires
composition, 199
corrosion resistance, 200
mechanical properties, 199
surface property, 200
welding, 199
Bezold–Brucke effect, 55
Biaxial flexural strength, 74
Binary alloys, 33
Bioacceptance, definition, 253
Bioactive, 401
definition, 253, 401
Bioactive cements, components, 149
Bioactive composites, 104
Bioactive glass, 405
Bioactive materials, 257, 355–356, 403
Bioactivity, 129, 265, 403
definition, 128
Bioceramics, 135

Index

Biocompatibility, 262
adverse effects of material, 356
allergies
concept, 356
frequencies, 360–361
Gell and Coombs classification, 360
immunotoxicity, 362–363, 363f
inflammation, 361, 362f
patch test, 362f, 362
sites for reactions, 360f, 360
symptoms, 361f, 361
types, 360
alloys, 172
basic concept, 356f, 356
bioactive materials/smart materials, 356
composites, 110
definition, 355
dental materials-tissues interaction, 356f, 356
effect on the environment/chemical waste,
363
legal regulations
Dental Products Panel (DPP) of the
FDA Medical Devices Advisory
Committee, 368
postmarket surveillance, 368
risk classes, 368
local effects
bone–implant interface, 360
concept, 356, 357f
foreign substances entry, 358f, 358
inflammatory response, 357f
microleakage, 359f, 359
nanoleakage, 359f, 359–360
periodontium, 359f, 359
pulp tissue, 358
tooth–restoration interfaces, 359f, 359–360
material selection guidelines
anamnesis (Patient’s Account of Medical
History), 379
intended use and indications for
materials, 378
main components of the material, 378
risk communication, 374f, 379
risks vs. benefits of dental materials, 378
safety and performance of material, 378,
379t
treatment planning, 379
occupational hazards for dental personnel,
363–364
patient reports and complaints of adverse
effects, 377–378
risk, 355–357
safety, 355–356
side effect of various material groups
dental alloys, 373–375
dental amalgam, 371f, 370–372
dental ceramics, 376
glass-ionomer cements, 376–377
hydrofluoric acid (HF), 376
methacrylates and resin composites,
372–373
natural rubber latex (NRL), 377
systemic effects
CMR effects, 358
concept, 357f, 356
estrogenicity, 358
variables, 358
toxic substances into body, 357

Biocompatibility test
animal tests, 366
dose–response relationship of toxicity, 365f,
365
extracts, 366
labeling, 368, 369f
purpose, 364
release of substances from materials, 364
requirements, 365
responsibilities, 367
Safety Data Sheet (SDS), 368
standards, 367–368
strategy, 366, 367f
usage tests, 366
in vitro tests, 366
Biocorrosion, 7, 8f
Bioglasses, bioactive ceramic biomaterials, 265
Bioinductive, definition, 401
Biointegration, 355, 360
Glossary of Prosthodontic Terms definition,
265
Biological delivery strategy, 407
Biological issue, teeth, 6
Biomaterials, 401
biocompatibility, 267
biomimetics, 406
de Condue, Albucasis, 254
definition, 401
delivery systems, 407
nanotechnology, 402
research/development/applications, 254
tissue engineering, 406
Biomechanics, 269
Biomimetics, 402, 406
definition, 401
Biosilicates, 135
Bisco Aelite LS, 102
Bismuth oxide, 139
Bisphenol A (BPA), 358, 372
Bisphenol A glycidyl methacrylate (bis-GMA),
89
Bisphenol-A glycidyl dimethacrylate
(bis-BAD), 88
chemical structure, 89f
Bite wax, 275, 303
Blacklights, 56
Blade implants, 254, 255f
Bleaches, 250
Bleeding process, 281
Block copolymer, 35
Body-centered cubic (BCC) cell, 20
Bond distance, 17, 17f
Bond energy, 17
Bond failure, metal-ceramic prosthesis, 211f
Bond strength
aging tests, 123
measurement, 122
metal-ceramic prosthesis, 212
orthodontic brackets, 125
self-adhesive cements, 125
Bonded abrasives, 340–341, 342f
definition, 332
Bonding, 16, 42
agents, 118, 122
amalgam, 126
applications, 124
definition, 15
drying stage, 118

415

Bonding (Continued)
etching time, 118
factors, 118
historical background, 115
primary bonds, 18
process/procedural factors, 117
resin, dental ceramics, 219
rinsing stage, 118
surfaces
cleanliness, 118
treatments, 125
Bonding systems, 149
resin cements, 145
Bone
biomechanical stress/strain, 269
blade implants, embedding, 255f
endosteal implant, placement, 256f
integration, 269
qualities, 267f
Bone-grafting materials, 404
Bone–implant interface, 360
Boric oxide, 208
Boxing wax, 275, 302–303
Braces, ceramic/metal-base orthodontic, 7f
Brackets, 6
Branched copolymer, 15, 36
Branched polymers, 35f
Branemark hybrid prosthesis (usage), 270f
Brass, grain size and appearance, 192f
Brazing, 171
Brinell hardness number, 78
Brinell hardness test, 78
Brittle, definition, 64
Brittleness, 72
Brushes and abrasive cleansers, 250
Bruxism, 7
Buffing, 337
definition, 332
Bulk reduction
definition, 332
Bulk-fill composites, 101
Burnished foil, sintering, 184
Burnout, 306
Burs, tungsten-carbide, 111
C
Calcination, gypsum, 295f, 295
Calcium aluminate glass-ionomer cement,
148, 151
Calcium hydroxide
insulating abilities, 135
liners, usage, 135
reaction, 135
Calcium phosphates
cements, 151, 403
definition, 128
coating biomaterial usage, 265
Calcium silicate, 135
powder, 403
Calcium sulfate dihydrate, 290
Camphorquinone (CQ), 94
CamX Spectra Caries Detection system,
331
Canal sealers, 132
Candelilla wax, 302
Cantilever beam
bending, 194f
elastic deflection, 193

416

Index

Captek crowns
advantage, 184
usage, 184
Carbon steels, 194
Carcinogenicity, 355, 366
Caries, quantitative light-induced
fluorescence, 330
Carnauba wax, 302
Carving, 160f, 159–160
Case-control studies, 392
definition, 390
Cast metals
liquid-to-solid transformation, 25
margin, burnishing, 71
surface quality, 312
Cast structure, homogenization, 30
Castability, 174
Casting
air voids, 321
crucibles, 318
defective, 321
definition, 306
direct-current arc melting machine, 318
discolorations and roughness, 324
distortion, 321
electrical resistance-heated casting machine,
317
foreign bodies, 321
gypsum investments, 315
high-heat thermal expansion technique,
315
hygroscopic low-heat technique, 315
incomplete, 323
induction melting machine, 318, 318f
liquid/powder ratio, 321
machines, 317
mold wall, molten alloy (impact), 321
pattern position, 322
phosphate investments, 316
porosity, 322
procedure, 314
shrinkage, 309
surface roughness, 321
time allowable, 317
torch melting/centrifugal casting machine,
317
water films, 321
wax elimination and heating, 314
Casting alloys
classification, 173
linear solidification shrinkage, 184t
melting range, 172
Casting fit
clinical evaluation, 320
discrepancies, detection, 320
Casting ring, 307f
liner, 313
expansion, ensuring, 314f
Casting waxes, 303
Casting-machine spring, 317
Catalyst, 277
Catalyst paste, 277
definition, 275
Cathode, 59
Cavitation-erosion wear, 81
Cavities
lining material, formulas, 134–135
varnishes, 135

Cavity liners, 135
definition, 128
Cement base, 136
definition, 128
thermal conductivity, 136t
Cementing
definition, 115
mechanics, 138f
Cements, 129
affixing devices, 152t
combination, 147
definition, 115, 128
disintegration, 131
durability, 132
fluid-to-solid transformation, 50
for luting, 137
properties, 152t
sealers, 125
solubility, 131
thickness, 138
definition, 128
prosthesis retention, 138
Cementum, 5
Central incisor metal-ceramic crowns,
porcelain margins, 56f
Centrifugal casting machine, spring-wound,
317f
Ceramco porcelain, 206
Ceramic bracket bases, 146
Ceramic FDPs, performance, 258
Ceramic implants
materials, mechanical properties/density,
259t
tensile/shear stresses, induction, 265
Ceramic powders, 42
Ceramic products identification, 231
Ceramic prostheses
fracture resistance, 226
resin cements, 146
Ceramic restorations
classification, 398
polycrystalline, 146
Ceramic steel, 216
Ceramic-ceramic systems, 213
Ceramic-like coated implant systems, 265
Ceramic/metal-base orthodontic braces, 7f
Ceramics, 16, 33
abrasiveness, 204
aesthetic qualities, 205
autoglazed veneer ceramic, 209f
biological properties, 204
CAD-CAM processing, 220
castable, 202, 213
color-matching ability, 205
compositions, 208t
conductivity, 205
core, 202
corrosion, 59
definition, 15, 202
dental, 202
glass modifiers, 208
glass-infiltrated core, 218
glassy phases, 33
glaze, 202, 209
hot-pressed (pressable ceramic), 202
indications and contraindications, 222t
indirect restoration, 9
mechanical properties, 34, 203

Ceramics (Continued)
physical properties, 205
slow crack growth, 208
stain, 202, 209
static fatigue or delayed failure, 77
strengthening, methods, 222
structure, 33, 223
types, 207
zirconia-based, 214
Ceramming, 213
Cercon zirconia core ceramic, 221f, 221
finished fixed dental prosthesis framework,
221f
green state ceramic milling, 221f
Ceresin, 302
Ceria, 216
Cerpress SL Pressable Ceramic System
(leucite-based product), 213
Chain-growth polymerization, 38–39,
39f
unsaturated functional groups, 39f
Chairside salivary sampling, 409
Chalk, 340
Change of state, 16
Charpy-type impact tester, 74
Chemical bonding mechanisms, 120f
Chemical corrosion, 59
Chemical inertness, 203
dental restoration characteristic, 203
Chemical polymerization, 8
Chemical properties, 50
Chemical waste, 363
Chemical-activated denture base resins
fluid-resin technique, 241–242, 242f
vs. heat-activated denture, 241
processing considerations, 241
technical considerations, 241
tertiary amine, 241
Chemical-activated resin, 93
advantages and disadvantages, 94
definition, 87
Chemisorption, 44
Chlorinated polyethylene (CPE), 252
Chondrogenesis, 405
Chroma
definition, 49, 54
Munsell scale, 54f
Chromium (Cr2O3), corrosion resistance,
176
Chronic periodontitis, 406
Class IV restoration, hybrid composites,
100f
Clenching, 7
Clenching force, 4
Clinical relevance
definition, 381
vs. precision, 384–385, 385f
Clinical significance
definition, 381
vs. statistical significance, 386
Close-packed hexagonal lattice, 22f
Cobalt-chromium (Co-Cr)
Alloys, fusion temperatures, 181
castability, 181
clasps, impact, 183
selective laser melting, 185t
stress-strain curves, 83f
wrought, 200

Index

Cobalt-chromium-molybdenum cast alloys,
components, 264
Cobalt-chromium-nickel alloys, 196
Cobalt-chromium-tungsten-nickel wire, 200
Coefficient of thermal expansion
definition, 49, 57
mismatch, 223
Cohesion, 15, 43
Cold welding, 171, 200
Cold working, 71, 191
brass grain size and appearance, 192f
definition, 171
polycrystalline alloy dislocation, 191
recrystallization, 193
tensile strength and ductility, 194f
Cold-bend test, 71
Colloid, 275, 287
Colloidal theory, 296
Color, 52
chroma, 54
definition, 49
hue, 54
L*a*b* color chart, 55f
L*a*b* color space, 54
matching, 55
space, three dimensions, 53
value, 54
Color matching, intraoral scanner/cameras,
327
Commercial resin cements, 145f
Commercially pure titanium (CP-Ti), 177,
254
American Society for Testing and Material
grades, 177
composition (percent by weight), 264t
definition, 171
laser welding, 187
Complete removable dentures, 9f
Compomer, 129, 148, 148f
definition, 128
Composite resin veneers, 112
Composite restorative materials, 99t
Composites, 4, 16, 129
benefits, 42
biocompatibility, 110
conventional, 88
definition, 15
in dentistry, 42
environment, 111
factors influencing, 42
finishing and polishing, 111
history, 88
indirect restorations, 112
longevity, 108
long-term survival rates, 110t
low-shrinkage, 102
materials and instruments, 111
microstructure, 42
placement time, 110
repair, 111, 112f
surface coating and sealing, 111
traditional, 88
Compression molding technique
mold preparation, 235f, 235
separating medium selection and
application, 235–236
Compressive strength (CS), 70f
Compressive stress, 66, 65f

Computer-aided design/computer-aided
manufacturing (CAD-CAM), 34, 172,
220, 409
aesthetic ceramics, 328
bone reduction image, 329f
ceramic prostheses production, 221
chairside milling, 221
chairside system, 327
clinical case, 328
complete denture, 239–241
definition, 326, 401
dental application, 184
drill positioning guide, 329f
feldspathic ceramic block, 220f
hybrid system, 327
indications for, 327
materials, 327
processing, 184
stand-alone digital impression systems,
327
structural ceramics, 328
subtractive manufacturing, 327
Computer-aided manufacturing (or milling)
(CAM), 326
Concentration cell
corrosion, 61
definition, 50
Condensable composites, 101
Condensation
condensation pressure, 159
condenser points, 159
definition, 153
goal, 159
low-copper alloys, 154
polymerization, 41
procedure, 159
Condensation polymers, 38
Condensation silicone, 277
Condensed porcelain mass, 212
Conditioning unit, agar impression materials,
289f
Conductivity, ceramics, 205
Conductors, 57
Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT),
326, 330, 408
definition, 326
Cones, 52, 55
Configuration factor (C-factor), 106–107,
125, 149
definition, 87
Constant-stress accelerated lifetime testing
(CSALT), 383
Contact angle, 116
definition, 15, 115
probing liquids, solid surfaces, 47t
wetting, 45, 46f
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health
(COSHH), 368
Controlled memory, 199
Cooling process
alloy composition, 30
metal-ceramic prosthesis, 212
peritectic temperature, 31
Copolymerization, 35f, 41
Copolymers, 35
definition, 15
graft or branched, 15
random, 15

417

Copper (Cu), equilibrium cooling, 30
Copy milling, 184
Core ceramics, 202, 205
Coring, 29
Corrective waxes, 275, 303
Corrosion, 58,
classification, 59
concentration cell, 61
definition, 50
electrochemical, 59
electrochemical mechanism, 59
impact, 30
protection, 62
resistance
alloys, 172
austenitic stainless steels, 195
beta-titanium alloys, 200
chromium (Cr2O3), 176
decreased, 191
dental amalgams, 163f, 163
stress, 61
wear, 81
Corrosive wear, 81
Corundum, 341
Coupling agent, 88, 91
definition, 87
Covalent bond, 18, 19f
Cracks
fiberoptic transillumination, 398f
in metal-ceramic crown, 225f
propagation, 106f
propagation, interruption, 225
Crazing, 246f, 246
Creep, 51, 178, 247,
definition, 49, 153
dental amalgams, 162–163, 163f
Crevice corrosion, 61
Critical strain-energy release rate, 75
Crosslink, definition, 15
Crosslinked polymers, 35f
Crowns
base-metal alloys, 177t
cracking and fracture, 215f
Lava zirconia-based core, 217f
prostheses, 10f
veneered, 217f
Crucible former, 307f
Crystal, 20
Crystal imperfections, 188
Crystal planes, 20
Crystalline particle strengthening, 225
Crystalline structure, 20
two-dimensional illustration, 21f
CS 3600, 327
Cure shrinkage, 106
Curing
composites, 91
cycles, 238, 240f
definition, 15
delayed, 107
depth, 96
dual-cured resins, 96
exposure time, 96
lamps, 95–96
photocuring management, 113
ramped, 107
resin-based composites, 39
resin-based composites classification, 93

418

Index

Curing cycles, 238, 240f
Cuspid-guided disocclusion, 204
Custom trays, 250, 279, 279f
Cutting, 332
Cuttle, 340
Cytokines, 404
Cytology, 401
Cytotoxicity test, 355–365
D
Debonding, shear-stress failure, 66
Debubblizer, 46, 283
Deflection–load plot, 247f
Deformation, 65
definition, 64
polymers, 36
twinning (significance), 191
Degree of conversion (DC), 89
definition, 87
resin-based composites, 105
Delayed curing, 107
Delayed expansion, definition, 153
Dental alloys
allergic reactions
cobalt, 375
gold, 375
immunotoxicity of metal, 375
nickel allergy, 374
Ni-Pd cross-reactivity, 375
palladium allergy, 375
patch tests, 374
symptoms, 375
titanium and titanium alloys, 375
as corrosion cell, 62f
elements in
atom size, 25t
crystal structure and chemical properties,
25t
physical properties, 24t
local reactions, 373–374
metal ions released from alloys, 373
metal-joining operations, 185
microstructure, 373
properties, 172
surfaces, heterogeneous composition
(galvanic corrosion), 61
systemic reactions, 373
Dental amalgams
alloy
amalgamation, 155–157, 156f–158f
composition, 154–155, 154t, 155f
definition, 153
particle shapes, 153, 154f
powder configuration, 155
programmable triturator, 154f, 154
trituration capsules, 153, 154f
clinical manipulation
carving and finishing, 159–160, 160f
condensation procedure, 159
mechanical trituration, 158, 159f
mercury/alloy ratio, 158
clinical performance
cavity preparations, 163
dimensional change, 164
improper cavity preparation/finishing,
164, 165f
leakage, 163
marginal breakdown, 164f, 164

Dental amalgams (Continued)
repaired amalgam restorations, 165–166
survival of amalgam restorations, 165f,
165
ultimate lifetime, 164
clinical symptoms after application
allergic reactions, 371
environmental mercury exposure, 372
local reactions, 371f, 371
mercury handling in the dental office,
372
systemic reactions, 371
creep, 51
definition, 153
in dentistry, 42
mercury poisoning symptoms, 370
mercury release, 370
properties
creep, 162–163, 163f
dimensional stability, 160–161, 161f
strength, 161–162, 162f
tarnish and corrosion resistance, 163f,
163
safety
allergy, 166
mercury hygiene in dental offices, 166
regulation of amalgam use, 167
toxicity, 166
Dental bonding
agents, 118
technologies, turning points/events,
116f
Dental castable ceramic, definition, 202
Dental casting alloys, classification, 173
Dental casting mold, 307f
Dental cements
history, 129
indications for, 129
ISO 9917-1 requirements, 132t
ISO Requirements, 132t
overview of, 130t
performance criteria, 131
Dental ceramics, 202
abrasiveness, 204
acidulated phosphate fluoride (APF),
376
adverse reactions, 376
classification, 209t
fracture-toughness test, 388
history, 205
indications and contraindications, 222t
radioactivity of, 376
resin bonding, 219
selection principles, 228
Dental composites
chronology, 89f
classification, 92
clinical use, 102
curing, 93
filler particle size, 96
manipulation characteristics, 100
properties, 102
components, 88
definition, 87
history and achievements, 89f
optimization, 382f, 382
Dental gold casting alloys, strengthening
(occurrence), 33

Dental implants
design features, 382
fatigue test, 384f, 388
history, 253
loading, success, 260
longevity, 261
placement, 263f
popularity, 261
success/failure, International Congress of
Oral Implantologists Health Scale
rating, 261t
Dental laboratory, variables, 181
Dental materials
auxiliary materials, 10
biocompatibility, 356f, 356. See also
Biocompatibility
challenges, 10
coefficient of thermal expansion, 58t
density/thermal properties, 57t
future need, 12
hardness values, 339t
performance, 383
preventive materials, 8, 8f
properties, 3
restorative materials, 8
safety, 12
selection, 82
tissue repair/regeneration, 12
viscosity, 50
Dental plaster, 275, 295
Dental prostheses, virtual testing, 381
Dental resins
bioactive TiO2 nanoparticles, 403
clinical performance, 404
Dental restorations, chemical inertness, 203
Dental stone, 275
high strength (type IV), 300
high strength, high expansion (type V),
301
type III stone, 300
Dental waxes, 275
components, 302
flow of, 303
mechanical properties, 304
properties, 303
residual stress, 304
thermal properties, 303, 304f
types, 302
Dentifrices, 350
abrasiveness, 351
components, 350, 350t
composition, 350
Dentin, 5, 6f
bond strength, 385
coefficient of thermal expansion, 58t
density/thermal properties, 57t
etching, 117
prepared surfaces, 142f
priming, 120
radiodensity, 56
reactionary, 134f
stress-strain plot, 70f
Dentin-bonding agent
adhesives, 121
bond strengths, 122
classification, 120t, 123
composition, 118
definition, 115

Index

Dentin-bonding agent (Continued)
design, 120
etchants, 118
filler particles, 122
ingredients, 122
initiators, 121
microleakage, 122
M–R–X structures, 121f
primers, 120, 121f
requirements, 118
solvents, 121
Dentinoenamel junction (DEJ), 5, 6f, 81
Dentin–resin bond, 359–360
Dentistry
eutectic alloys, applications, 31
wrought metal, application, 193
Denture base
resin. See Prosthetic polymers and resins
retention, 43f
Denture cleansers, 250
Denture flask assembly, 238f
Denture liner, definition, 233
Denture repair, 248
Denture-base resins, in dentistry, 42
Dentures
complete removable, 9f
removable partial, 9f
Depth of cure, 94
definition, 87
Design of experiments (DOE)
definition, 381
flowchart, 382f, 382
steps, 383
Diametral compression test, 72, 73f
Diametral tensile strength, 72
Diamond, 341
Diamond abrasives, 341, 344
Diatoms, 341
Dicor glass-ceramic crowns, 213
Die stone, 300, 307
Dies, 50, 307t
Diffuse reflectance, 53
Diffusion, 21
Digital, definition, 326
Digital dentistry
additive manufacturing, 328
augmented reality, 331
color matching, 327
cone-beam computed tomography, 330
intraoral scanner/cameras, 326
prototyping tools, 327
virtual reality, 331
Digital impression, 326
Diketone photosensitizer, 95f
Dilatant
definition, 49
viscosity, 51
Dimensional change, in dies, 307t
Dimensional stability, 286, 286f
of amalgam
clinical significance, 164
mechanism of change, 160–161, 161f
moisture contamination, 161f, 161
hydrocolloid impressions, 292
zinc oxide–eugenol (ZOE) impression
paste, 295
Dimer dicarbamate dimethacrylate
(DDCDMA), 103, 104f

Dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate
(DMAEMA), 94
Dipoles, generation, 19
Dipping wax, 302
Direct composite restoration, 8, 9f
Direct metal laser sintering (DMLS), 185, 330
Direct-current arc melting machine, 318
Disinfection, hydrocolloid impressions, 293
Dislocations, 189
definition, 171
movement, absence, 191
Dispersion strengthening, 225
Disproportionation, 40f
Dissimilar metals, 60
4,8-Di(methacryloxy methylene)tricyclodecane (TCDDMA), 103
Divacancy, example, 189f
DMG Constic, 103
Doping, 214
Dose–response relationship of toxicity, 365f,
365
Double-cord technique, 280
Dough-forming time, 237
Dressing, definition, 332
Dry strength, gypsum products, 299
Dual-cured resin, 87, 96
Ductility, 65, 71
alloys, 173
cold working and annealing time, 194f
Duplicating materials, 293
DX-511, 103f, 103
Dynamic mechanical mixing, 281
E
Edge dislocation, 189
cubic crystal structure, 189f
Effective volume, 381, 386
Elastic deformation, 64, 68f
Elastic impression materials, 276
Elastic limit, 68–69
Elastic memory, 305
Elastic modulus, 18, 70, 70f
definition, 64
reduction, 194
Elastic properties, 67
Elastic recovery, definition, 15
Elastic strain, 37, 37f
Elastomeric impression materials
characteristics, 288t
chemistry, 277
common failures, 288t
components, 277
dimensional stability, 286
disinfection, 286
elasticity and viscoelasticity, 284
hand mixing, 281
impression-making technique, 281
impression removal, 282
impression trays, 279, 279f
manipulation, 280
mishandling, 287
polyether, 278, 279f
polysulfide impression material, 277, 277f
properties, 283, 284t
rheological properties, 283
tear strength, 285, 285f
tissue management, 280
working and setting times, 283

419

Elastomers, 37, 275–276
Electrical resistance, spot welding, 185
Electrical resistance–heated casting machine,
317
Electrochemical mechanism of corrosion, 59
Electrochemical properties, 58
Electrode potential, 59
Electroforming, 185
Electrogalvanism, definition, 50
Electromagnetic radiation, 53
Electromotive series, definition, 50
Electron-cloud model, nitrogen atom, 16f
Electronegativity, 28
Elements, periodic chart, 26f
Elgiloy wires, 199
Elongation, 67
Embryos, 24
Emerging technologies/products, research
(flow chart), 402f
Emery, 341
Enamel, 4
abrasiveness, 204
acid-etching, 11
carious lesion, 7f
coefficient of thermal expansion, 58t
density/thermal properties, 57t
elastic modulus, 81
etching, 117
glass-ionomer restoration, 126f
light effect, 53
microfracture, 204
plaque formation, 43f
refractive index, 53
stress-strain plot, 70f
transmission electron microscope images, 5f
Enamel-bonding agents, 118
Endodontic cement formula, 151
Endodontic sealer, 148
definition, 128
ISO 6876 and ADA 57 requirements for,
132t
solubilities, 132
Endodontics, 404
sealers, usage, 125
Endosseous implants, designs and materials,
258f
Endosteal implants, 254
blade designs, 258f
definition, 253
partial arch restorations, 258f
placement, 256f
Endurance limit, 173
Endurance strength, 76
Energy-balance approach, 76f
Enterococcus faecalis, 402
Epinephrine, 280
Epithelial implant, definition, 253
Epoxy system, 406
Epoxy-based sealer, 125, 148
Equiaxed grain microstructure, 25
Equilibrium-phase diagrams, 28
calculated weight percentages, basis, 29f
eutectic alloy, 30f
platinum-silver system, 31f
Erosion, 8f, 332, 334
Erosion test, cements, 131
Erosion wear, 81
Erythematous reaction sites, 361, 362f

420

Index

Esthetic dentistry, 52
Esthetics
definition, 49
restoration, 11
Estrogenicity, 355, 358
Etch and rinse adhesives, 122f
Etch-and-rinse technique, 117, 123
Ethyl silicate–bonded investments, 312
European Conformity (CE) marking, 12
Eutectic alloys
applications, 31
equilibrium-phase diagram, 30f
physical properties, 31
Eutectic composition, 30
Evidence-based dentistry (EBD)
definition, 390
level of evidence, 390
observational studies, 391
in vitro testing, 390
Evidence-based medicine, 381
External plasticizer, 37
F
Fabricating prostheses, alternative
technologies, 184
Fabrication
direct composite inlays, 112
metal-ceramic prosthesis, 212
molten alloy, 172
Face-centered cubic (FCC) cell, 20
Fatigue behavior, S-N diagram, 77f, 77
Fatigue failure, 76
Fatigue resistance, alloys, 173
Fatigue strength, 76, 173
Fédération Dentaire Internationale (FDI),
364, 387
Feldspathic ceramics, 202
Feldspathic porcelain, 203, 207
autoglazed, 209
glazing, 209
principal phase fields, 207f
types, 207
Ferric sulfate, 135
Ferrite, 194
Ferritic stainless steels, 195
compositions, 195t
Fillers, 42, 88, 122
benefits, 90
characteristics, 90
definition, 87
function, 90
loading maximizing, 102
ormocer, 91
particle size, 96, 97t
types, 91
Film thickness
definition, 128
dental cements, 131
Filtek LS (3M ESPE), 103
Filtek Universal, 403
Finishing
benefits, 333
composites, 111
definition, 332
procedures
aerosols, production, 338
goals, 333
technique, steps, 345

Finite-element analysis (FEA), 229f
accuracy, 384
definition, 381
elements, 384
solid model, 383, 384f
stress and strain results, 384
Fissure sealants, 126
Fixed dental prostheses (FDPs), 66f, 66, 206
base-metal alloys, 177t
sag deformation, 179f
Flavored fluoride varnish, 136f
Flexibility, 71
Flexural strength, 73
Flow, 52
definition, 276
division, 281
temperature, 186
Flowable composite, definition, 87, 100
Fluid-resin technique, 241–242, 242f
Fluids
rheological behaviors, 51f
viscosity, 51
Fluorapatite glass-ceramic, 214
Fluorescence, 56
Fluoridated varnishes, 135
Fluoride recharge, 134
Fluoride release
fillers, 90
profiles, 133f
Fluoride-releasing materials
clinical significance, 133
factors affecting, 133
fluoride-release profiles, 133f
Flux
definition, 171
entrapment, 186
inclusions, 187
metal oxides, combination, 186
noble-metal alloys, 186
soldering, 185
usage, 186
Force, 4, 50, 65
Foreign bodies, casting, 321, 322f
Formocresol, 135
Four-point test, 73f
Fractography
all-ceramic prostheses, 398
crack features, 397
definition, 390
fracture surface characteristics, 396
principal fracture paths, 397f, 397
vinyl polysiloxane impression, 397
Fracture
ceramic connectors, 228
Griffith criterion, 76f
midpontic, three-unit bridges, 229f
plastic deformation, 67
porcelain crowns, 206
restorations, 74
susceptibility
metal-ceramic/all-ceramic restorations,
design effect, 226
tensile, resistance, 204
toughness, 204
Fracture toughness, 64, 75
definition, 64
glass-ionomer materials, 144t
restorative materials, 144t

Fractured connectors, 227
Fractured maxillary central incisor, 100f
Fractured microfilled composite, 99f
Fractured Procera AllCeram premolar crown,
397f
Fractured prosthesis, repair, 248
Fracture-resistant all-porcelain crowns, 206
Free radicals, 92
chain transfer, occurrence, 41f
definition, 87
Fretting wear, 81
Friction, 78, 80
kinetic, 80
laws of, 80
mechanism, 80
static, 80
Frit, 207
Frost paradigm, 269
schematic diagram, 269f
Fuel-gas combustion, thermal characteristics,
186t
Fully stabilized zirconia (FSZ), 216
Fumed silica particles
formation, pyrogenic reaction, 97f
transmission electron microscope image,
98f
Furnace soldering, 186
Fused deposition modeling (FDM), 326, 330
Fused filament fabrication (FFF), 330
Fused granular fabrication (FGF), 330
Fused particle fabrication (FPF), 330
G
G-aenial Universal Flo, 403
Galvanic corrosion, 59
definition, 50
Galvanic currents
clinical significance, 62
mouth, 60f
Galvanic shock, 60
definition, 50
γ-Methacryl-oxypropyltrimethoxy silane, 92f
Garnet, 341
Gel, 287
definition, 275
Gel point/gelation, 106
definition, 87
Gelation, 106
alginate impression material, 290
definition, 275
reversible hydrocolloid, 287
General controls, 368
Genetic issue, teeth, 7f
Genotoxicity, 355, 358
Gingivitis, 361, 362f, 373
Giomer, 104, 147
Glass
insulating abilities, 135
modifiers, 208
strengthening, thermal tempering (usage),
225
Glass polyalkenoate cement, 140
Glass-ceramics, 34, 213
definition, 202
fluorapatite, 214
Glass-infiltrated core ceramic systems, 218
cross-sectional illustration, 218f
definition, 202

Index

Glass-ionomer cement (GIC), 405
adverse reactions, 376–377
calcium aluminate, 149f
chemistry and setting, 141
clinical manipulation, 142
composition and release of substances, 376
cumulative fluoride release, 144t
definition, 128
fracture toughness, 144t
high-viscosity, 144
nominal compositions, 141t
properties, 144t
structure, 142f
unreacted particles, 142f
usage, 140
Glass-transition temperature, 21, 303
definition, 15
plot, 23f
polymethacrylate ester, 38f, 38
Glaze ceramics, 202, 209
Globally Harmonized System of Classification
and Labeling of Chemicals (GHS),
368, 369f
Glycerin, 289
Glycerol phosphate dimethacrylate (GPDM)
monomers, 103
Gold
atoms, location (randomness), 33
ductility, 71
monoatomic metals, 34f
Gold crown, mechanical retention, 137f
Gold-based alloys, 175
Gold-copper system, 31
alloys, heat treatment, 175
phase diagram, 32f
structure, 32f
Gold-palladium alloys, metal-ceramic systems,
179
Gold-palladium-silver alloys, metal-ceramic
systems, 179
Gold-platinum-palladium alloys, high noble/
noble alloys, 179
Graft copolymer, 15, 36
Graft materials, 404
Grain, 25
boundary, 25
definition, 15
Grain growth, 193
definition, 171
Grain refinement, 26
definition, 171
Grain size, 26
solidification, 28
Gray scale, 49, 54
Green shrinkage, 312
Green state
definition, 202
milling, 221f
Green strength, gypsum products, 299
Greening, 181
Griffith energy approach, 396
Griffith theory, 75
Grinder’s disease, 338
Grinding
definition, 332
operation, 337
processes, biological hazards, 338
Ground quartz filler particles, 97f

Guidelines for material selection
anamnesis (Patient’s Account of Medical
History), 379
intended use and indications for materials,
378
main components of the material, 378
risk communication, 374f, 379
risks vs. benefits of dental materials, 378
safety and performance of material, 378,
379t
treatment planning, 379
Gum dammar, 302
Gutta-percha, 125, 129
Gypsum
die stones, 307
fabrication, 50
models, 276
Gypsum-based investment, 295, 315
Gypsum-bonded investments
casting shrinkage, 309
classifications, 309
composition, 309
dimensional change, 309f
hygroscopic expansion
magnitude, 310
sources, 315
water/powder (W/P) ratio, 310f, 310
porosity, 311
setting expansion, 310
storage, 311
strength, 311
thermal expansion, 310, 310f–311f
Gypsum products
calcination process, 295f
care of, 301
cast care, 302
definition, 275
dental stone, 300–301
impression plaster (type I), 300
infection control, 302
manipulation, 301
mixing and pouring, 301
mixing time, 296
model plaster, 300
mounting casts, 301
powder particle, 295f
production, 295
properties, 300t
proportioning, 301
refractory filler addition, 295
setting, 296
dimensional changes, 298f
expansion mechanism, 297
hygroscopic, 298
reaction, 296, 296f
setting time, 296
control, 296
modifiers for controlling, 297
strength, 299
manipulation and additives, 300
water content, 299
water/powder ratio, 299
types, 300
working time, 296
H
Hagger’s dentin-bonding system, 120
Hand dermatitis, 360

421

Hand mixing, elastomeric impression, 281
Hard glass, 91
Hardened type III/IV gold alloy castings,
restoration, 33
Hardness
alloys, 173
definition, 64
Heat, homogenization heat treatment, 29
Heat-activated denture base resin
vs. chemical-activated denture base resins,
241
compression molding technique
mold preparation, 235f, 235
separating medium selection and
application, 235–236
polymerization
polymerization cycles/curing cycles, 238,
240f
temperature–time heating curves, 238,
240f
via microwave energy, 239, 240f
preparation
crosslinking agents, 234f, 236
denture flask assembly, 238f
dough-forming time, 237
injection molding technique, 238, 239f
packing, 237f–238f, 237–238
polymer-monomer interaction, 236
polymer-to-monomer ratio, 236
powder–liquid systems, 234f, 236
representation, 234f
working time, 237
Hertzian cone cracks, 223
Hertzian load, 75
Heterogeneous microfill composites, 97
Heterogeneous nucleation, 24
Hierarchy of evidence, 381, 382f
High noble (HN) alloys
all-metal prosthesis usage, 175
gold-platinum-palladium alloys, 179
metal-ceramic systems, 179
systems, solid-state reactions, 31
High-frequency induction, argon/arc, 176
High-heat thermal expansion technique, 315
High-palladium alloys, Pd-Ga system, 33
High-viscosity glass-ionomer cements, 144, 145f
Homogeneous microfill composites, 97
Homogeneous nucleation, 24
Homogeneous solution, 28
Homogenization heat treatment, 29
Hooke’s law, 67–68, 70
Hot-isostatically pressed (HIP) core ceramic,
213
Hot-pressed ceramics, 202, 213
H-statements, 368
Hue
definition, 49
Munsell scale, 54f
three-dimensional color solid, 54
Humans, vision role, 52
Hume–Rothery rules, 28
Hunter L*a*b* color chart, 55f
Hybrid composites, 100, 101f
Hybrid ionomer cement, 147, 151
definition, 128
Hybrid layer, 117, 123
Hybrid material, 278
Hydration theory, 296

422

Index

Hydraulic cements, 128, 149
Hydrocolloid impressions
accuracy, 293
dimensional stability, 292
disinfection, 293
duplicating materials, 293
failures, 299t
gypsum setting, 292
irreversible, 290
properties, 292
reversible, 287
sol–gel transformation, 287
Hydrodynamic theory, 358
Hydrofluoric acid (HF)
calcium gluconate gel, 376
emergency treatment, 376
etching, 146
exposure of skin, mucosa, and eyes, 376
fume inhalation, 376
risks, 376
ventilation, 376
Hydrogen, heat source, 186
Hydrogen bond, 20
dipole attraction, 20
formation, 20f
Hydrogen bridge, 20
Hydroxyapatite (HA), 265, 403
HA-coated implants, 265
characteristics, 266
coating and bone quality, 267, 267f
2-Hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA), 120,
148
Hygroscopic expansion, 310, 310f
definition, 306
magnitude, 310
water/powder (W/P) ratio, 310f, 310
Hygroscopic low-heat technique, 315
Hygroscopic setting expansion, 275, 298, 298f
Hygroscopy, 298
Hypersensitivity, 355, 360
I
Ice, 16
IdentAlloy certificate, 174f
IdentAlloy codes, 231
IdentAlloy program, 173
IdentCeram certificate, 231, 231f
Imbibition, 275, 292
Immunotoxicity
concept, 362
glutathione (GSH) to mercury ions, 363f,
362
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α)
secretion, 363f, 363
Impact strength, 74, 247
Implantation, 253
definition, 253
Implants
attachment mechanism, 256
biocompatibility, 267
biomaterials, 262
bone, integration, 269
ceramic and ceramic-like coated metal, 265
classification, 254
clinical success, evaluation, 260
components, 259, 259f
dentistry, Stage 1 surgery, 260f
design, 254

Implants (Continued)
load transfer, balance, 262
material/host, primary surface interactions,
268
metallic, 262
placement, 260, 269
properties, 256
prosthesis, fit (consideration), 269
restoration, intention, 260
selection, 266
site, loading condition types (occurrence),
269
Stage 2 surgical technique, 260f
strength, 266
surgical placement, 260
Implant-supported restorations, difference, 258
Implant-to-bone interaction
(osseointegration), 257
Impression
digital, 326
removal, 276
shelf life, 292
trays, 279, 279f
wax, 303
Impression compound, 276, 294
Impression materials, 275
classification, 276, 277t
composition, 276
in dentistry, 42
elastic, 276
fluid-to-solid transformation, 50
gypsum products, 295
hydrocolloids, 287
inelastic, 276, 294
irreversible, 276
reversible, 276
setting mechanism, 276
Impression plaster, 294
Improper cavity preparation/finishing, 164,
165f
In vitro bonding tests, 182
In vitro research, dental materials
accelerated lifetime testing (ALT), 383f,
383
clinical vs. statistical significance, 386
definition, 381
design of experiments (DOE), 382f,
382–383
drawbacks, 381
hierarchy of evidence, 381, 382f
limitations of standards, 388
merits, 381
precision vs. clinical relevance
dentin bond-strength evaluation, 385
microtensile bond-strength test (μTBS),
385f, 385
single material property measurement,
384
standardization
ADA Specifications and Acceptance
Program, 387
International Standards, 387–388
testing methods, 381
virtual modeling, 383–384, 384f
Weibull size effect, 385–386, 386f–387f
In vitro tests, 366, 390
In vivo fluoride recharging, 134
In-Ceram Spinel (ICS), 218

In-Ceram Zirconia, 219
Incomplete casting, 323, 323f–324f
Indirect posterior composites, 112
Indirect restorations, 112
Indirect restorative materials, 8, 9f
Induction
addition polymerization, 39, 39f
melting casting machine, 318f
Inelastic, definition, 275
Inelastic impression materials, 276
impression compound, 294
impression plaster, 294
zinc oxide–eugenol, 294
Infection-control procedures, 247
Inflammation, allergies, 361, 362f
Infrared spectroscopy, 409
Inhibitors, 87, 92
Inhomogeneous dental gold alloy, tarnish/
corrosion (impact), 30
Initiator, 121
definition, 87
polyether impression material, 278
Injection molding technique, 238, 239f
Inlay wax, 302
definition, 276
flow requirements, 304t
manipulation, 304
thermal expansion, 304f
thermal expansion coefficient, 58
time–temperature cooling curve, 304f
Insulators, 57
Interatomic bonds, 17
Interfacial zone fracture, cross-sectional
illustration, 226f
Intermetallic compound, 28
International Congress of Oral
Implantologists Health Scale, dental
implant success/failure rating, 261t
International Organization for Standardization
(ISO), 387
Interstitial atom, 188, 189f
Interstitial solid solution, 28
Intraoral digital scanner, digital impressions,
326
Invariant point, 30
Investment, 307f
burnout, 309
ethyl silicate–bonded investments, 312
gypsum-based materials, 309
hygroscopic expansion, 310
materials, 308
phosphate-bonded, 311
procedure, 313
shrinkage, compensation, 313
types, 309
Ion exchange, 225
Ion implantation, 262
Ionic bonds, 18, 19f
Ionomers, 124, 129
IPS Empress (leucite-based product), 213
IPS Empress 2 (Ivoclar Vivadent), 213
Iron-carbon system, 194
Irreversible hydrocolloid, 290
Irreversible materials, 276
ISO 7405#1997, 364
ISO 14971#2019, 356
ISO 10993, Biological Evaluation of Medical
Devices, 367

Index

ISO 7405#2018, Evaluation of
Biocompatibility of Medical Devices
Used in Dentistry, 364, 367
ISO standard, 388
iTero, 327
Ivoclar Tetric EvoCeram Bulk Fill Aessencio
Technology, 102
Ivory-colored wax, 302
Izod-type impact tester, 74
K
Kalore, 103f, 103
Kelvin (K), 57
definition, 49
Kerr Vertise Flow, 103
Kieselguhr, 341
Kinetic energy, 16
Kinetic friction, 80
Knoop hardness test, 79
L
Labeling, 368, 369f
Laboratory grinding/finishing kit, 347f
Lamellar eutectic structure, formation, 30
Lamellar structure, formation, 30
Large-particle composite, 97
Laser photothermal radiometry (PTR), 408
Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF), 330
Laser welding, commercially pure titanium,
187
Laser-induced fluorescence, 408
Latexes, 251
Lattice types, 22f
Lava zirconia-based core, 217f
Laws of Sliding Friction, 80
Layered structure, formation, 30
LED lamps, 95
Lethal dose fifty (LD50), 355–365
Lichenoid contact lesions, 361f, 361
Lichenoid reactions, 371
Life Ceramics Analysis and Reliability
Evaluation software (CARES), 229
Light
attenuation, 96
nature, 52
source effect, 56
visible spectrum, 52f
white, 52f
Light-activated denture base resins, 242, 243f
Light-cured composite, 88, 94
advantages and disadvantages, 94
definition, 87
diketone photosensitizer, 95f
Line defects (dislocations), 189, 189f
Linear coefficient of expansion
definition, 49
Linear polymers, 35f
Linear shrinkage, 243
Liner, 307f
Liquefaction temperature, agar, 287
Liquid remineralizing dentin bonding agents,
404
Liquid-based cytology, 409
Liquid/powder ratio (L/P), 321
Liquid-to-solid transformation, 25
Liquidus, 28
Lithia disilicate, 213, 328
Lithia-disilicate-based ceramic core, 215f

Lithium disilicate all-ceramic crown, 10f
Local effects, 356, 357f
bone–implant interface, 360
concept, 356, 357f
foreign substances entry, 358f, 358
inflammatory response, 357f
microleakage, 359f, 359
nanoleakage, 359f, 359–360
periodontium, 359f, 359
pulp tissue, 358
tooth–restoration interfaces, 359f, 359–360
Local reactions
dental alloys, 373–374
dental amalgam, 371f, 371
gingival reactions, 373
pulp reactions, 372
Long-term resilient soft liner
definition, 233
processing, 249
Lost wax technique, 171–172, 306
Low-fusing ceramics, 207
Low-shrinkage composites, 102
Low-viscosity hybrid ionomers, 147
Lucite, 328
Luminous reflectance, 49
Luting, 124
cements, usage, 137
mechanical retention, 137
Luting agent, 124, 137
definition, 128
M
3M Filtek One Bulk Fill Smart Contrast Ratio
Management system, 102
Machinable glass-ceramic (MGC), 206, 213
Macrofill composite, 88, 97
Macromolecules, polymers, 34
Magnesia, 216
Magnesia-alumina spinel, 218
Magnesium oxide (MgO), 33, 34f
Magnet, definition, 50
Magnetic materials, 62
Magnetism, 63
Magnetite, 63
Malleability, 71, 173
definition, 64
Malocclusion, 6
Managing accurate resin curing (MARC), 113
Mandibular staple implant, 255
Manually condensed feldspathic veneering
porcelains, 212
Marginal breakdown
clinical performance, 164f, 164
definition, 153
Martensite, 195
Martensitic stainless steels, 195
Master die, preparation, 306
Mastication, forces, 136
Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS), 368
Matrix, definition, 88
Maturation, 128–129
Maxillofacial prosthetics
chlorinated polyethylene (CPE), 252
latexes, 251
polyurethane polymers, 252
silicone rubbers, 252
tear resistance, 251
vinyl plastisols, 251

423

Maximum elastic strain, 67
Mechanical integrity, 11
Mechanical interlocking, 46
Mechanical issue, teeth, 7, 8f
Mechanical mixing, 313
Mechanical properties
strain, 67
strength, 67
stress, 65, 65f
stress-strain properties, 68
Medit i500, 327
Medium wax, 302
Melanocortin peptides, 407
Mercury, 166, 370. See also Dental amalgam
Mercury/alloy ratio, 158
Mesio-occulso-distal (MOD) restoration, 310
Metal bonds, 342
Metal oxides flux, combination, 186
Metal prosthesis, 23
Metal-backed strips, 343
Metal-ceramic (MC) alloys, castability studies,
181
Metal-ceramic (MC) applications
alloy requirements, 178
base-metal alloys, 177t
metals, porcelain bonding, 178
solidus temperature, 178
thermal contraction, coefficient, 179
Metal-ceramic (MC) contraction mismatch,
effect, 179
Metal-ceramic (MC) crown, 10f
crack patterns, 226f
crack, three-unit bridge cooling, 225f
designs, 227f
porcelain veneer, residual stress, 224f
Metal-ceramic prosthesis
alloy composition and properties, 178, 210t
bond failure, 211f
bond strength, 212
ceramic types, 207
compatibility, 211
cooling, 212
definition, 202
fabrication, 212
firing procedure, 212
high noble alloys
compositions, 175, 180t
physical and mechanical properties, 175t
multiple firings, impact, 212
occlusal surface, design, 182
porcelain bonding, 211
ultralow-fusing ceramics, 207
Metal-ceramic restorations, fracture
susceptibility, 226
Metal-ceramic (MC) systems, 206
gold-palladium alloys, 179
gold-palladium-silver alloys, 179
gold-platinum-palladium alloys, 179
high noble alloys, 175, 179
metal-ceramic contraction mismatch, effect,
179
noble alloys, 175, 179
palladium-copper-gallium alloys, 181
palladium-gallium alloys, 181
palladium-gold alloy, 179
palladium-gold-silver alloys, 179
palladium-silver alloys, 179
stress and intraorally induced stresses, 224f

424

Index

Metal-ceramic (MC) systems (Continued)
thermal compatibility, 179, 224f
thermal contraction coefficient, 179
thermal expansion coefficient, 179
thermally incompatible, 224f
Metal-joining processes, 185
Metallic bond, 19, 19f
Metallic implants, 262
materials, mechanical properties/density,
259t
usage, debate, 266
Metallic mercury, 370
Metallic prostheses, resin cements, 146
Metallic restoration, 61f
Metals, 16
characteristics, 23
definition, 15
dissimilar, 60
electromotive series, 60t
grain refinement and size, 26
laboratory grinding/finishing kit, 347f
liquid-to-solid transformation, 25
microstructure, 24
plastic deformation, inherent ability, 188
porcelain, bonding, 178, 211
solidification, 24
strengthening, effects, 191
theoretical/observed shear strengths, 188
Metamerism, 56
definition, 49
Methacryl polyhedral oligomeric
silsesquioxane, 91f
Methacrylates, 360
allergic reactions, 373
local reactions
gingival reactions, 373
pulp reactions, 372
released substance vs. polymerization, 372
systemic reactions, 372
4-Methacryloxyethyl trimellitic acid
(4-META), 103
12-Methacryloyloxydodecylpyridinium
bromide (MDPB), 122
Methyl mercury, 370
Methylmethacrylate
chain transfer, 41f
free radical approaches, 39f
Methylmethacrylate copolymer, 35f
Micelles, 287
Microcracks, 246f, 246
Microcrystalline wax, 302
Microfilled (heterogeneous microfill)
composites, 97
fractured, 99f
inorganic filler loading, 97
resin filler particles preparation, 98f
Microleakage, 115, 359f, 359
definition, 115
measurement, 122
Micromechanical bonding, 16, 46
Micromechanical interlocking, 360
Micromotion, 261
definition, 253
Microporosity, 322f
Microstructure, 15, 25
Microtensile bond-strength test (μTBS), 385f,
385
Microwave irradiation, 299

Minamata Convention on Mercury, 167
Mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA), 135
definition, 128
pH, 150
pulp capping, 135
pulpotomies, 135
Mineral-based waxes, 302
Mini-implants
indications, 254
orthodontic anchorage, 256f
Mixing systems, 280, 280f
Model, definition, 275
Modeling plastic, 294
Modified α-hemihydrate, 295
Modified alginates, 290
Modulus of elasticity, 70
Molecule, 16
Molten alloy, rapid cooling (roomtemperature water bath/ice-water bath
usage), 32
Moment, 66
Monoclinic lattice, 22f
Monolithic zirconia, 217
Monomer and mer, 16
Monophase technique, 282
shear rate and elapsed time, 283t
stone casts and dies, 283
Montan wax, 302
Mouth, galvanic current, 60f
Multicomponent alloy systems, 33
Multiple-mix technique, 281, 282f
Munsell three-dimensional (3-D) color space,
53
Mutagenicity, 355, 358
Mylar-backed abrasive strips, 342f
N
Nanocomposites, 99
Nanofill composites, 99
Nanoleakage, 359f, 359–360
Nanometer-sized silica particles, 122
Nanoparticles, 151, 402
Nanostructures, 405
Nanotechnology, 401–402
Natural gas, heat source, 186t
Natural healing biological process, 12
Natural rubber latex (NRL)
allergic reactions, 377
composition and release of substances,
377
precautionary measures, 377
Natural teeth, implants (attachment), 270
Natural waxes, 302
N’Durance, 103
Near-ultraviolet radiation, 56
Newton, 4
Newtonian viscosity, 51
Newton’s third law of motion, 65
Nickel-chromium (Ni-Cr) alloys, 181
Nickel-titanium alloys, 196
endodontic instrument, 198, 199f
mechanical properties, 197
superelasticity and shape memory, 197
Nickel-titanium wires, 405
Ni-Cr-Be alloys, 174
Nitinol, 196
Nitrogen atom, electron-cloud model, 16f
Nobio QASi composites, 402

Noble (N) alloys
all-metal prosthesis usage, 175
gold-platinum-palladium alloys, 179
metal-ceramic prosthesis composition, 177t
metal-ceramic systems, 179
systems, solid-state reactions, 31
torch melting, 318
Noble metals, 58, 172
content classification, 173, 173t
corrosion, 62
definition, 171
Noble-metal wires, 200, 200t
physical properties, 200t
Nonbonded abrasives, 343
Noncarious cervical carious lesions, 8f
Nonconsumable tungsten electrode, argon/
arc, 176
Noncrystalline structure, 21
Noneugenol cements, 140
Nongypsum die materials, 307
No-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL),
355, 365
Normal setting expansion, 275, 298
NovaBone Dental Putty, 404
N-phenyl glycine and glycidyl methacrylate
(NPG-GMA), 120
Nucleus formation, 24
O
Observational studies, 391
Observer, effect, 55
Obturation, 125
definition, 115
Occlusal reduction, diamond burs (usage),
343f
Occupational hazards for dental personnel,
363–364
Omnichroma, 403
Opacity, 53
definition, 49
Opening-mode loading, 76
Optical effects, 52
Optical modifiers, 92
Optically based caries diagnosis, 330
Oral cavity
dental material challenges, 10
force, 4
mastication, 4
Oral environment, electrochemical action
(impact), 58
Oral mucosa, epithelial implant, 255
Organically modified ceramics, 91
Ormocer, 91
Orthodontic anchorage, mini-implants
(usage), 256f
Orthodontic bands, cementing, 144
Orthodontic brackets, 125, 146
Orthogonal arrays, 383
Orthorhombic lattice, 22f
Osseointegration, 253, 355, 257, 360
Osteoconductive
definition, 401
properties, 404
Osteogenesis, 405
Osteoinductive
ability, 265
definition, 253
Osteonecrosis, 406

Index

Ostim-Paste, 404
Oxidation, 59
Oxidation potential, 59
Oxide-doped zirconia, 216
Oxygen-inhibited layer, 93
definition, 88
P
Packable composites, 101
Palladium-based alloy
optical microscopic image, 27f
scanning electron microscope image, 27f
Palladium-based alloys, 33
Palladium-copper-gallium alloys, 181
Palladium-gallium alloys, 181
Palladium-gold alloy, 179
Palladium-gold-silver alloys, 179
Palladium-silver (Pd-Ag) alloys, 28, 31f
equilibrium-phase diagrams, 29f
metal-ceramic systems, 179
Paper-backed discs, 342f
Paraffin wax flakes, 302
Partial arch restorations, endosteal implants,
258f
Partially stabilized zirconia (PSZ), 216
Pascal (Pa), 4
Passivating oxide, 195
Passivation, 262
Paste–paste system, 146
Patch test for allergies, 362f, 362
Patient reports, 377–378
Pattern waxes, 302
Pearlite, 194
Pentron Fusio Liquid Dentin, 103
PepGen P-15, 404
Peptide amphiphiles (PAs), 405
Percent elongation, 173
Perceptibility threshold (PT), 54
Peri-implantitis, 261
Perimucositis, 261
Periodic chart (elements), 26f
Periodontal ligament stem cells (PDLSCs),
407
Periodontal tissue regeneration, 406
Periodontium disease, 359f, 359
PerioGlas, 404
Periosteum, subperiosteal implant
(positioning), 257f
Peritectic alloys, 31
Permanent or plastic deformation, 64
Phase and phase diagram, 28
compositions, 30
definition, 16
interpretation, 29
solid solutions, 29
pH-cycling testing methodology, 391
Phosphate-bonded investments
casting, 316
composition, 311
setting reaction, 311
surface quality, 312
thermal expansion, 312, 312f
working and setting time, 312
Photocuring, 113
Photopolymerization, 8
Photothermal radiometry and modulated
luminescence (PTR-LUM), 408
Physical properties, 50

Pickling process, 319
Piston-on-three-ball test, 74f
Pit
corrosion, 61
sealants, 126
Plaster of Paris, 295
setting expansion, 299t
strength
drying, 300t
mixing time, 304t
water/powder (W/P) ratio, 304t
Plastic deformation, 19
dislocation movement, absence, 191
shear force, 68f
Plastic strain, 37
Plastic-backed strips, 343
Plasticity, 65
Plasticization, 37
Plasticizers, 37
Plasticizing, 36–37
Pneumoconiosis, 364
Point contact, 75
Point defects, 188, 189f
Poisson’s ratio, 72
Polish, definition, 332
Polishing, 159–160, 160f, 332
Polyacrylic acid (PAA), 148
Polycarboxylate, insulating abilities, 136
Polycrystalline, 25
Polycrystalline alloys, dislocation movement,
190
Polycrystalline alumina, 328
Polycrystalline ceramic restorations, 146
Polycrystalline zirconia, 328
Polydispersity, polymers, 35
Polyether impression material, 278
elasticity and viscoelasticity, 284
ring-opening polymerization, 279f
Polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS), 91
Polymeric prostheses, resin cements, 146
Polymerization, 16, 34
addition, 39
chemistry, 38
condensation, 41
curing, 96
mechanism, 38
microwave energy, 239, 240f
polymerization cycles/curing cycles, 238, 240f
step-growth, 41
temperature–time heating curves, 238, 240f
shrinkage
dimensional changes, 244f, 244
maxillary denture bases, 243t
thermal shrinkage, 243–244
volumetric and linear shrinkage, 243
Polymer–monomer interaction, 236
Polymers, 16
chain branching, 35
copolymer structures, 35
crosslinking, 35
definition, 16
dissolution properties, 36
fundamental nature, 35
linear, yield point, 69f
mechanical properties, 36
molecular organization, 36
molecular weight, 35
polymerization, 38

425

Polymers (Continued)
radiopacity, 56
rheometric properties, 37
solvation properties, 37
thermal properties, 37
Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), 88, 233,
234f
Polysulfide impression material, 277, 277f
Polysulfide materials, 286
Polyurethane polymers, 252
Polyvinyl siloxane (PVS), 286
hydrophilized, 286
impression material, 277, 284
sealers, 148
Polyvinylchloride (PVC), 37
Pontic
chipped veneer ceramic, 215f
veneer ceramic chipping, 215f
Porcelain
adherence, 180
bonding, 172
classification, 209t
debonding, metal pontic substrate, 223f
definition, 202
in dentistry, 42
discoloration, silver (impact), 179
feldspathic, 202–203
finishing kit, 346f
oxide layer, thickness/wetting, 181
thermal contraction mismatch, 224
VITA Zahnfabrik development, 206
Porcelain fused to metal (PFM), 9, 178, 206
Porcelain teeth, 251
Porosity, 245f, 245
Posterior composites, selection criteria, 113
Postmarket surveillance, 368
Potassium silicate glass, amorphous structure,
203f
Powder–liquid system
compomer, 148f
for hand mixing, 149f
Powder-to-liquid (P/L) ratio, 131
Precious metals, 173
Precipitation hardening, 171, 191
Precision, 381, 384
Predominantly base metal (PB), 173
Premarket approval (PMA), 368
Press-on metal (POM) method, 220
Pressure, 4, 64, 66
Preventive dental material, 3, 8, 8f
Preventive sealant, 8f
Preventive-resin restoration (PRR), 126
Primary bond, 18, 19f
combination of, 19
definition, 16
Primary sprue, wax pattern orientation, 307f
Primers, 118, 120, 121f
definition, 115
silane, 220
Procera AllCeram, 219
Procera AllCeram alumina-based crown, 397
Processing stresses, 246
Processing wax, 303
Product safety data sheet (PSDS), 368
Proof stress (yield strength), 173
Propagation, 39
and chain growth, 40f
reactions, 39

426

Index

Propane, heat source, 186
Propane-oxygen torch flame, flame zones,
187f
Proportional limit, 67, 69, 70f
definition, 64
ProRoot MTA, 149
Prospective analysis study, 390, 392
Prostheses
cementing mechanics, 138f
devices and restorations, 276
fabrication, 178
first-stage contraction, 184
Prosthetic polymers and resins
acrylic resins, 233, 234f
additional procedures
denture cleansers, 250
denture repair, 248
rebasing resin dentures, 250
relining resin denture bases, 250
resin impression trays and tray materials,
250
short-term and long-term resilient soft
denture liners, 248–249
biological properties
allergic reactions, 248
infection-control procedures, 247
toxicology, 248
CAD-CAM procedures, 239–241
chemical basis, 234f
chemical-activated denture base resins,
241–242, 242f
general fabrication technique, 234
heat-activated resin
compression molding technique,
235–236, 235f
polymerization procedure, 238–239
preparation, 237f–239f, 236–238
representation, 234f
light-activated denture base resins, 242, 243f
maxillofacial prosthetics
chlorinated polyethylene (CPE), 252
latexes, 251
polyurethane polymers, 252
silicone rubbers, 252
vinyl plastisols, 251
physical properties
crazing, 246f, 246
creep, 247
impact strength and hardness, 247
polymerization shrinkage, 242–244,
243t, 244f
porosity, 245f, 245
processing stresses, 246
solubility, 246
strength, 246–247, 247f
water sorption, 245
resin teeth for prosthetic applications, 251
Prosthetic resin-veneering materials, 112
Prototyping, definition, 326
Provisional restorative materials, 10
Pseudoelasticity, 197
Pseudoperiodontium, 257
Pseudoplastic, definition, 49
Pseudoplastic fluids, viscosity, 51
Pseudoplasticity, 275, 283
P-statements, 368
Puce, 53
Pulp, physiological functions, 5

Pulp capping, 129
definition, 128
Pulp damage, 358, 372
Pulp protection, cements, 134
Pulpotomies, 135
Pumice, 341
Pure metals, 23, 26f
Putty-wash technique, 277, 282
Pyrogenic reaction, 97f
Q
Quantitative light-induced fluorescence
(QLF), 408
caries diagnosis, 330
definition, 326
QLF-D BiLuminator, 331
Quartz, 90, 341
Quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH) lamps, 95
Quaternary ammonium bound to silica
(QASi), 402
Quenching, 32
R
Radiopacity, 56, 90
Ramped curing, 107
Random copolymer, 15, 35
Randomized controlled clinical trial, 392
definition, 390
Reactionary dentin, 134f
Reactor, 277
Rebasing
definition, 233
resin dentures, 250
Reciprocal clasp, 64
Recombinant human bone morphogenetic
protein-2 (rhBMP-2), 404
Recovery, 171, 193–194
Recrystallization, 191
definition, 171
Reflection, 53
definition, 49
Refractory
definition, 276, 306
material, 302, 307f
Refract/refraction, 53
definition, 49
Reinforcement material, 42
Reinforcing filler particles, 97t
Reinforcing material, 42
Relining, definition, 233
Relining resin denture bases, 250
Remineralizing agents and materials, 404
Removable partial dentures (RPDs)
alloys for, 183
base metal alloys, 183
composition/mechanical properties, 183t
clasp seating, 65f
ductility and malleability, 173
economic considerations, 172
elastic modulus, 172
framework, 9f
metal components, 183
titanium-based alloys, 183
Repaired amalgam restorations, 165–166
Replantation, 253
definition, 253
Repulsion force, 17
Reservoir, 307f

Residual compressive stresses, development,
223
Residual flux, 186
Residual stress, 179, 223, 224f
Resilience, 72
definition, 64
Resilient soft denture liner
care, 249
compositions, 249
definition, 233
processing, 249
purpose, 248
short-term soft liners/tissue conditioners, 249
Resin cements, 129, 151
ceramic prostheses, 146
commercial, 145f
composition, 145
dual-cured cements, 145
evaluation, 146
manipulation, 146
metallic prostheses, 146
orthodontic brackets, 125, 146
polymeric prostheses, 146
restorative composites, low-viscosity
versions, 124
self-adhesive, 124
setting, 145
solubility, 132
Resin filler particle preparation, 98f
Resin impression trays and tray materials, 250
Resin materials, advantage, 88
Resin restorative materials, 403
Resin tag, 115–116
Resin teeth
chemical bonding with denture base resins,
251
fabrication, 251
impact resistance and ductility, 251
vs. porcelain teeth, 251
wear resistance, 251
Resin-based adhesives, 46
Resin-based composites
cements, 219
classification, 93t
components, 88
composition and function, 88
coupling agent, 91
degree of conversion, 105
fillers, 90
history, 88
indication, 93t
inhibitors, 92
matrix, 89
matrix constraint, 105
optical modifiers, 92
properties, 105
restorations, 345, 345f
strengthening mechanism, 106
wear, 107
Resin-based filling material, 46
Resin-modified glass ionomer (RMGI), 124
cement, 129
clinical indications, 147
definition, 128
hybrid ionomer, 147
2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate, 148
marketing, 147
polymerization, 147

Index

Resin-modified glass-ionomer cement
(RMGIs), 147, 147f, 376–377
Resinoid-bonded abrasive, 342
Resins, 34
bonding, dental ceramics, 219
definition, 16, 88
pit/fissure sealant usage, 126
radiopacity, 56
Response-surface methods/sequential
minimum-energy design, 383
Restorations
anterior class III silicate cement, 13f
clinical assessment, 392
esthetic appearance, 11
Fédération Dentaire Internationale (FDI)
Criteria, 393b, 396b
fracture, 74
longevity, 11
Original Cvar and Ryge Criteria, 393
survival probabilities, 109
retention, 11, 11f
Restorative dental materials, 8
definition, 3
direct, 8, 9f
indirect, 8, 9f
temporary restorative, 10
Restorative dentistry, 407
Restorative glass ionomer cements, properties,
144t
Restorative materials
aging, 406
finishing and polishing benefits, 333
fracture toughness, 144t
Retentive clasp, 64, 65f
Retraction cords, 280
Retrospective studies, 392
definition, 390
Reversible hydrocolloid, 287
composition, 289, 290t
distortion, 290
sol–gel transformation, 287
Reversible materials, 276
Rheology, 50
definition, 49
Rheometric properties, 37
Rhombic lattice, 22f
Rhombohedral lattice, 22f
Rockwell hardness test, 79
Rods, 52
Roman cement, 151
Root canal sealers, 125
Rouge, 341
Rubber-bonded abrasives, 342
S
Safety Data Sheet (SDS), 368
Sag, definition, 49
Salivary genetic testing, 409
Salt, atomic arrangement, 20f
Sand, 341
Sandblasting, 341
Sandwich technique, 147
Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly
Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR),
371
Screw dislocation, 189f, 189
Sealant, 8f, 126
Secondary bonds, 19

Selective laser melting, 185
cobalt-chromium (Co-Cr) powder
compositions, 185t
Self-activating capsules, 158
Self-adhesive flowable composites, 103
Self-adhesive resin cement, 146
Self-assembling materials, 405
definition, 401
Self-diffusion, 21
Self-etch adhesives, 122f, 123
Self-healing (self-repairing) materials, 405
Sensitization, 195, 355, 361
Shape memory, 197
Shear strain, 50f, 51f
Shear stress, 66, 188f
Shear thinning, 275, 282–283
Shore hardness test, 79
Short-term soft liner (tissue conditioner)
composition, 249
definition, 233
Shrinkage, stress, 106
Silane primers, 220
Silica, allotropic forms, 42
Silica-based ceramic, silane bonding, 220f,
220
Silicate cement, 129
Silicate glass, 203
Silicon carbide, 341
Silicone
addition, 277
condensation, 277
rubbers, 252
Silicosis, 338
Silorane chemistry, 103
Silver diammine fluoride (SDF), 136
Silver-copper system, 30
equilibrium-phase diagram, 30f
phase transformations, 30, 30f
Silver-palladium alloys, 176
Simple hexagonal lattice, 22f
Single teeth (restoration), endosteal blade
implant designs (usage), 258f
Sintering, 34, 178, 202, 206
burnished foil, 184
process, 342
Sliding friction, 200
Slip, 34f, 34
Slip direction, 189
Slip plane, 34, 67, 189
Slip system, 189
Smart materials, 401
definition, 401
Smear layer, 115
Soda–lime glass, 33
Soft glass, 91
Soft wax, 302
Softening heat treatment, 176
Soft-Start, 107
Solder, 185
Soldering, 175
acetylene, heat source, 186
brazing, 185
definition, 171
filler metal, 186
fluidity, 186
flux, 185
furnace soldering, 186
gap width, 187

427

Soldering (Continued)
heat sources for, 186
natural gas, heat source, 186t
propane, heat source, 186t
stainless steel, 196
technical considerations, 196
technique considerations, 186
temperature/time, 187
torch flame, zone, 187f
wetting, 186
Sol–gel transformation, 287
Solid adhering, dentistry, 43f
Solids
electrochemical properties, 58
magnetic materials, 62
rheology, 50
solubility, conditions, 28
structural relaxation, 51
thermal properties, 57
Solid solutions, 28
definition, 16
interstitial, 28
mechanical properties, 28
phase diagram interpretation, 29
substitutional, 28
Solid-state reactions, 31
Solidus temperature, 28, 178
Solubility, 246
Solutes, 28
Solution, 28
Solution heat treatment, 176
Solvation properties, 37
Solvents, 28, 121
Solvus line, 30
Special controls, 368
Specific heat, 57
Specifications, 381, 387
Specular reflectance, 53
Spinel/spinelle, 202
Spiral wheel polishers, 342f
Spot welding, 185
Springback, definition, 171
Spring-wound casting machine, 317f
Sprue
attachment, 308
definition, 276, 306
design, 307
diameter, 308
problem, shrinkage, 308f
former connection, 308
length, 308
orientation, 308f
porosity, 308f
position, 308
primary sprue, wax pattern orientation,
307f
representation, 307f
reservoir, addition, 308
Sprued wax pattern, 307
Stabilization, 195
Stain ceramics, 202, 209
Stainless steel, 264
austenitic stainless steels, 195
carbon steel, 194
compositions, 195t
ferritic stainless steels, 195
martensitic stainless steels, 195
soldering, 196

428

Index

Stainless steel (Continued)
types, 195
welding, 196
Stainless steel alloys, 194
Stainless steel orthodontic wire, 196t
Staple bone implant, 255
Static friction, 80
Static mixing, 146, 275
design, 281f
elastomeric impression, 281
Statistical significance
vs. clinical significance, 386
definition, 381
Stem cells from apical papillae (SCAPs), 407
Step-growth polymerization, 38, 41
Step-stress accelerated lifetime testing
(SSALT), 383
Stereolithography, 330
Sticky wax, definition, 276
Sticky wax, 302–303
Stimulus-responsive “smart” materials, 405
Stock tray, 279, 279f
Stone casts and dies, 283
Strain, definition, 16, 64
Strain field, 32
Strain hardening, 71, 171, 191
definition, 64
Strength, 67
Strength, amalgam
amalgam hardening rate effects, 162
compressive and tensile strength, 161–162
condensation effects, 162
mercury content effects, 162f, 162
porosity effects, 162
trituration effects, 162
Strengthening mechanism, resin-based
composites, 106
Stress, 4
combined, 66
compressive, 65f, 66
definition, 16, 64
relief, 191
shear, 66
tensile, 65f, 66
unit, 66
Stress concentration, 34, 74
definition, 64
Stress corrosion, 61
definition, 50
Stress distribution, 66
Stress gradient, 66
Stress intensity, 64
Stress intensity factor, 75
Stress relaxation, 51
Stresses, 23
Stress-relief heat treatment, 196
Stress-strain properties, 68, 68f
Structural relaxation, 51
definition, 49
Subperiosteal implant, 254–255, 257f
definition, 253
positioning, 257f
Substitutional solid solution, 28
Substrate metal, 185
Subsurface porosity, 322f, 322
Suck-back porosity, 323f, 322
Sulfur contamination, addition silicone, 277
Supercooled liquids, 21

Supercooling, 24
Superelasticity, 171, 197
Superficial active carious lesions, 6
Superlattice, 32
Surefil-SDR flow, 403
Surface, 43f, 43
Surface defects, 74
Surface energy, 16, 43, 44t
Surface flaws, impact, 75f
Surface interactions, hardness, 78
Surface profilometry, 395
Surface tension, 16, 44
Surface-fatigue wear, 81
Surfactant, 46
Surgical implants, 260
Survival, clinical analysis, 392
Swept-source optical coherence tomography
(SS-OCT), 408
Syneresis, 275, 292
Synthetic resins, 34
Synthetic waxes, 302
Systemic effects, 356, 357f
CMR effects, 358
concept, 356, 357f
estrogenicity, 358
variables, 358
Systemic reactions
dental alloys, 373
dental amalgam, 371
methacrylates and resin composites, 372
T
Taguchi robust design, 383
Tarnish, 58
alloys, 172
definition, 50
dental amalgams, 163f, 163
impact, 30
Tartaric acid, glass-ionomer cement setting,
141f, 141
TC 106, 387–388
Tear-strength test
configurations, 285f
specimen designs, 285
Technique sensitivity, 381, 383
Teeth
biological issue, 6, 7f
genetic issue, 7f
mechanical issue, 7, 8f
movement, achievement, 197
Teeth, structure
anterior tooth and supporting tissues, 5f
cementum, 5
dentin, 5, 6f
dentin-enamel junction, 5, 6f
enamel, 4
pulp, 5
third molars, properties, 82t
Tempering, 195
Temporary restorative material, 3, 10
Tensile fracture, susceptibility, 204
Tensile strength, 161–162, 194f
Tensile stress, 65f, 66
Tensile stress-strain curve, 71f
Termination, 40f
vinyl monomers, 39
Terrometallic porcelain teeth, placement,
205

Tesla (T), 50, 63
Tetrafunctional silorane monomer, 104f
Tetragonal lattice, 22f
Tetragonal unit cell structures, 216f
Tetragonal zirconia polycrystal (TZP), 216
Texturing, 262
Theobromine, 403–404
TheraCal and TheraCal PT, 135
Thermal compatibility, 202
Thermal conductivity, 57
cement base, 136t
definition, 49
Thermal contraction coefficient (TCC),
179
Thermal diffusivity, 57
definition, 49
Thermal energy, 17
Thermal expansion, 17
gypsum-bonded investments, 310
high-heat, 315
Thermal insulation, zinc phosphate cement
(basis), 136
Thermal properties, 57
alloys, 172
polymers, 37
Thermal shrinkage, 243–244
Thermal tempering, 225
Thermally compatible metal-ceramic system,
224f
Thermally compatible systems, 211, 223
Thermo-photonic lock-in imaging (TPLI),
408
Thermoplastic polymers, 16, 37
Thermoset polymers, 16, 38f, 38
Third molars, properties, 82t
Thixotropic, definition, 49
Thixotropic fluid, viscosity, 51
Thixotropy, 275, 284
Three-body abrasion, 334f, 334
Three-dimensional (3-D) printing, 185, 328,
409
advantage, 328
model, diagnostic casts, 329f
technologies, 410f
Three-point test, 73f
Three-unit bridge, veneer ceramic chipping,
215f
Three-unit ceramic bridge
connector dimensions, 227f
lithia disilicate core ceramic, usage
(postcementation photograph),
228f
Threshold dosage, 365
Thymol, 289
Tie line, 29
Tin oxide, 341
Tissue integration, 257
Tissue engineering, 406
Tissue fluid, 61
Tissue repair/regeneration, dental materials,
12
Titanium, 404
castings, surface, 176
corrosion, 62
laboratory casting, challenge, 184
products, 264
Titanium alloys, 177
all-metal prosthesis usage, 177

Index

Titanium alloys (Continued)
American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM) F 67 unalloyed titanium,
tensile properties/impurity limits, 177t
fabrication, oxygen effect (elimination), 178
manipulation, 178
stabilizers, 177
Titanium-based alloys, 182
high-noble and base-metal alloy properties,
182t
removable partial dentures, alloys, 183
in vitro bonding tests, 182
Titanium-molybdenum alloy (TMA), 199
Tooth
contour, 64
undercut, 64
Tooth loss, 406
Tooth preparation, 280
Tooth structure
hardness values, 339t
properties, 82t
strength, 81
tensile properties, 82
Toothbrushes, 351
Torch flame, zones (division), 187
Torch melting (noble metal alloy), 318
Torch melting/centrifugal casting machine,
317
Torsion, 66
Total-etch technique, 118
Toughness, 72
definition, 64
Toxicity, 355, 358
dental amalgams, 166
Toxicology, 248
Traditional composite, 97
Transformation toughening, 202
rack propagation, 225
Transient stress, 179, 223
Translucency, 53, 92
definition, 49
Transmandibular implant (TMI), 255
Transmission, 49, 53
Transmit, 49
Transosteal implant
definition, 253
panoramic radiograph, 257f
transmucosal abutment, 257f
Transparency, 49, 53
Transplants, failure rates (recognition), 254
Tray compound, 294
Tribology, 64, 79
Tricalcium silicate product, 404
Triclinic lattice, 22f
Tri-/dicalcium silicate cements, 149
solubilities, 132
Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate
(TEGDMA), 89f
TRIOS 3, 327
Triple-tray technique, 284
Tripoli, 341
Trituration
consistency of the mix, 158, 159f
definition, 153
objective, 158
triturators, 158
True Definition Scanner, 327
True strength, 71

True stress, 71
definition, 64
True/truing, definition, 332
Tungsten-carbide burs, 111
Tungsten-inert gas (TIG) arc, 185
Twin, 191
Twinning, 191, 193f
Twinning plane, 191
Two single-paste systems, compomer, 148f
Two-body abrasion, 334f, 334
Two-body abrasive wear, 81
Two-putty system, 281
U
Ultimate strength, 71
Ultralow-fusing ceramics, 207
Ultrasonography, 409
Undercooling, 24
Uniaxial flexural strength, 73, 73f
Unit cells, 20
cubic space lattices, 21f
Universal bonding agents, 145
Urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA), 90
chemical structure, 89f
U.S. Public Health Service Guidelines
(USPHS), 392
Usage tests, 366
Utility wax, 303
V
Vacancy
definition, 21
example, 189f
Vacuum mixing, 313
Valence, 28
Valence electrons, 16
Value
definition, 49, 54
Munsell scale, 54f
van der Waals forces
definition, 16, 19
dipole attraction, 19f, 19
Varnish, 129
definition, 128
flavored fluoride, 136f
fluoridated, 135
infection control, 135
Veneered crown, 217f
Veneered leucite-based glass-ceramic core
restorations, 213
Veneering ceramics (layering ceramics), 207
compositions, 208t
expansion and contraction coefficient, 207
properties, 230t
tensile strength, 227
Venus Diamond (Kulzer), 103
Vickers hardness number (VHN), 173
Vickers hardness test, 79
Vinyl monomers
addition polymerization, stages, 39
induction, 39
propagation, 39
termination, 39
Vinyl plastisols, 251
Vinyl polysiloxane (VPS) impression material,
277
Virtual reality (VR), 326, 331
Viscoelastic materials, 284

429

Viscoelastic strain, 37, 37f
Viscoelastic/viscoelasticity, 275
Viscosity, 50
definition, 49
fluids, 51f, 51
shear strain, 50f
Vision
phenomenon, 52
role, 52
VITA In-Ceram Alumina, 218
Vita shade guide, 55f
VITA Zahnfabrick, porcelain development,
206
VITABLOCS Triluxe Forte (VITA
Zahnfabrik) ceramic, 221
Vitapan classical shade guide, tab
arrangements, 55f
Vitreous-bond materials, 342
VM 9 Ceramics, 222t
Voids, 245f, 245
Voltage (V), 59
Volumetric shrinkage, 243
Voxel, definition, 401
Vulcanization, 377
W
Water
density/thermal properties, 57t
gypsum products, 299
sorption, 245
Water/powder (W/P) ratio
compressive strength, 299f
plaster of paris
setting expansion, 299t
strength, 304t
Water-settable glass ionomer, 141
Wax., 275. See also Dental waxes
baseplate, 303
bite, 303
boxing, 303
carnauba, 302
casting, 303, 314
corrective, 303
dipping, 302
elastic memory, 305
elimination and heating, 314
impression, 303
inlay, 302, 304
microcrystalline, 302
mineral-based, 302
Montan, 302
natural, 302
pattern, 302
processing, 303
sticky, 303
synthetic, 302
utility, 303
Wax patterns
cleaner, 313
distortion, 307
primary sprue, 307f
removal, 308
and sprue design, 307
sprued, 307
Wear, 107
abrasive, 81
adhesive, 80
analysis, 393

430

Index

Wear (Continued)
cavitation-erosion, 81
corrosive, 81
debris, 334
definition, 80
direct method, 395, 395f
erosion, 81
fretting, 81
indirect method, 391f, 393, 394f
micro-CT scan, 395f
resistance improvement, 81
surface-fatigue, 81
types of, 80
Weibull distribution, 77, 78f
Weibull modulus, 77
Weibull size effect
conversion of specimen strengths, 386,
387f
effective volume, 386
specimen size, 385
Weibull distribution, 385
Weibull modulus, 386f, 386
Welding, 171
beta-titanium wires, 199
stainless steel, 196
Wet corrosion, 59
Wet strength, gypsum products, 299
Wetting
adhesion, 44, 116
contact angle, 45, 46f
definition, 16
Wetting agent, 16, 46
White spot lesions (WSLs), 6
White stone, 341

Whitening toothpastes, 350
Work hardening, 71
definition, 64
Working range, 171
Working time, 237
Wrought alloys, 171–172, 188
annealing effects, 193
dentistry, 194
plastic deformation, 188
recovery, 193
types of, 193
Wrought structure, cast structure, 196
X
Xenoestrogens, 355, 358
X-ray energy, absorption, 56
X-rays, spectrum placement, 56
Y
Yield point, 69
Yield strength, 69, 172
definition, 64
Young’s modulus, 70
definition, 64
Yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia polycrystal
(Y-TZP) ceramic
hydrothermal degradation, 218
physical properties, 219t
transformation toughening, 217f
Yttria-stabilized zirconia, 202
Z
Zinc oxide, definition, 128
Zinc oxide eugenol, 140

Zinc oxide (ZnO) powder, 129
Zinc oxide–based cements, 138
Zinc oxide–eugenol (ZOE), 129, 294,
294f
consistency, 295
dimensional stability, 295
root canal sealers, solubilities, 132
setting reaction, 294f, 294
Zinc phosphate cement, 129, 131, 136
bismuth oxide, 139
definition, 128
mixing, 139
thermal insulation, 136
Zinc polycarboxylate cement, 139
powder#liquid ratio, 140
setting time, 140
working time, 140
Zirconia, 214
core materials, veneering ceramics
(properties), 230t
fracture strength, 217
monolithic, 217
stabilized, 214
transformation toughening, 225
yttria stabilization, 202
Zirconia reinforced lithia silicate, 328
Zirconia-toughened alumina (ZTA),
219
physical properties, 219t
Zirconium dioxide
ceramics, 214
mechanical properties, 203
Zirconium oxide, 341
Zirconium silicate, 341

