14

Casting Investments and
Casting Procedures
OUTLINE
Preparation of the Master Die

Casting Procedure

Wax Pattern and Sprue Design

Clinical Evaluation of Casting Fit

Investment Materials

Causes of Defective Castings

Investing Procedure

KEY TERMS
Burnout Process of heating an invested mold to eliminate the
embedded wax or plastic pattern.
Casting (1) The process by which a wax pattern is converted to
a metallic replica of a prepared tooth restoration. (2) A dental
restoration formed by the solidification of a molten metal in a
mold.
Hygroscopic expansion Amount of setting expansion that occurs
when a gypsum-bonded casting investment is immersed in

38 °C water during setting. (See Chapter 13, Auxiliary Materials,
for more information on this process.)
Refractory Capable of sustaining exposure to a high temperature
without significant degradation.
Sprue The mold channel through which molten metal or ceramic
flows into a mold cavity.
Sprued wax pattern A wax form consisting of the prosthesis pattern and the attached ingate or sprue network.

The lost wax method has been used to fabricate prostheses made of
metal, ceramic, and polymers. Although the principle of the process is the same for all three classes of materials, there are distinct
differences unique to each material. Fabrication of ceramic- and
polymer-based prostheses was presented in Chapters 10 (Fabrication of Metal-Ceramic Prostheses) and 11 (Heat-Activated
Denture Base Resins), respectively. This chapter will focus on the
metals only.
The process requires a die that duplicates the oral tissue needing a replacement or prosthesis. A wax pattern (Figure 14-1) of the
prosthesis is built on the laboratory indirect die by carving wax
to the exact dimension. The wax pattern is then removed from
the die and placed in a casting ring to be filled with investment
materials. After the investment sets, the casting ring is heated to
melt and burn out the wax. The investment material in the casting
ring is now a negative of the final prosthesis. The negative mold
is then filled with molten metal. After the metal cools, the investment is fragmented and removed, leaving the prosthesis. This is a
very brief description of the process. In practice, there are many
fine details. The focus of this chapter is first to prepare a die suitable for fabricating the wax pattern. The wax pattern is then fixed
in a casting ring with cylindric segments known as an ingate or
sprue for the flow of molten metal to fill the mold cavity, made by
investing in a refractory material (Figure 14-2). The molten metal

is introduced to the empty space with pressure. Finally, there is a
discussion of casting defects.

306

CRITICAL QUESTION
What methods can be used to increase the abrasion resistance of master dies?

Preparation of the Master Die
The most commonly used die materials are type IV and type V
improved gypsum dental stones (Chapter 13, Types of Gypsum
Products). Type IV stones have a setting expansion of 0.1% or
less, whereas type V stones may expand as much as 0.3%. This
greater expansion is useful in compensating for the relatively large
solidification shrinkage of base-metal alloys.
The chief disadvantage of the type IV gypsum die is its susceptibility to abrasion during carving of the wax pattern. To overcome
deficiencies of gypsum dies, several modifications or different
materials have been used:
• Silver or copper plating, coating the surface with cyanoacrylate
adhesive, or adding a die hardener to the gypsum can be used
to improve abrasion resistance of gypsum master dies.
• Several coats of resin-based spacer, such as nail polish, can be
painted on a stone die away from the margins of the restoration

CHAPTER 14

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

TABLE 14-1

307

Dimensional Change in Dies Made
From a Silicone Impression Compared
With a Standardized Die
DIMENSIONAL CHANGE (%)

Reservoir
Sprue former

Die material

Occlusal

Cervical

Type IV die stone

0.06

0.00

Type IV stone plus hardener A

0.16

0.08

Type IV stone plus hardener B

0.10

0.10

Silica-filled epoxy resin

−0.15

−0.26

Aluminum-filled epoxy resin

−0.14

−0.19

• Figure 14-1 Primary sprue oriented directly toward the wax pattern

Electroformed silver

−0.10

−0.20

(left). Note the spherical reservoir on the vertical sprue. Indirect sprue design showing a horizontal reservoir runner bar that is positioned near the
heat center of the invested ring (right).

Reproduced with permission from Toreskog S, Phillips RW, Schnell RJ: Properties of die
materials: a comparative study, J Prosthet Dent 16:119, 1966.

G

H
F

C
B

E
D

A

• Several gypsum die stones have been compounded with resins
to provide the advantages of both materials. These modified die
stones maintain the low expansion of conventional die stone,
but they also have the increased toughness and resistance to
carving imparted by the resins.
• Metal dies produced from electroplated impression material
have moderately high strength, adequate hardness, and excellent
abrasion resistance. The first step is treating the impression to
make it conductive to electrical current. The metallized impression is the cathode in the electroplating bath, along with a silver plate as the anode. A direct current is applied to transfer
silver from the plate to the impression, a reverse process of corrosion discussed in Chapter 3, Electrochemical Properties. The
impression is then filled with dental gypsum stone. When the
stone sets, a die with an electroformed metal shell is obtained.
It is important to note that some of the methods described can alter
the die dimensions slightly, thus reducing accuracy (Table 14.1).

• Figure 14-2 Diagrammatic representation of a dental casting mold:
A, Crucible former. B, Sprue. C, Cavity formed by wax pattern after burnout. D, Reservoir. E, Investment. F, Liner. G, Casting ring. H, Recommended maximum investment thickness of approximately 6 mm between the
end of the mold cavity and the end of the invested ring to provide pathways for sufficient gas escape during casting.

CRITICAL QUESTION

to produce relief space for cement luting agent and ensure
complete seating of an otherwise precisely fitting casting or
coping.
• To eliminate the possibility of distortion of the wax pattern on
removal from the die or during the setting of the investment,
one technique is to pour up the die with an investment material with comparable properties to die materials.
• Nongypsum die materials, such as acrylic, polyester, and epoxy
resins, are used because of their superior abrasion resistance.
Compatibility between die material and the impression material is specific to the brand rather than to chemical types of
impression materials. Even though these dies are generally
undersized in comparison with the prepared tooth, they are
used successfully, presumably because dimensional compensation has occurred during the investing and casting procedure.

Wax Pattern and Sprue Design

What casting deficiencies may result when: (1) the sprue former is too small
in diameter, (2) the sprue former is attached without flaring to thinner areas,
(3) the sprues are oriented toward thin areas of a wax pattern, or (4) the
sprues are of inadequate length to position the wax pattern less than 6 mm
from the end of the invested ring?

To provide a pathway or ingate to the mold cavity for molten
metal, the wax or resin pattern must have one or more cylindrical
wax segments attached at the desired point(s) of metal entry; this
arrangement is termed a sprued wax pattern. A sprue is the channel in a refractory investment mold through which molten metal
flows. After the wax pattern has been made, a sprue-former base is
attached to the sprued wax pattern, an investment ring is pressed
into the sprue-former base, and an investment slurry is vibrated
into the ring to embed the wax pattern in the investment, usually under vacuum. Examples of sprued wax patterns on a sprueformer base are shown in Figure 14-1.
The diameter, the length of the sprue former (also referred to
simply as the sprue), and the position of attachment depend on the

308

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

type and size of the pattern, the type of casting machine to be used,
and the dimensions of the ring in which the casting will be made.

Wax-Pattern Removal
The sprue former should be attached to the wax pattern with
the pattern on the master die, provided that the pattern can be
removed directly in line with its path of withdrawal from the die.
Any motion that might distort the wax pattern should be avoided
during removal. The gauge selection and design for the sprue
former are often empirical, but optimal performance during the
casting process is based on the five general principles discussed in
the following subsections.

Sprue Diameter
Select a sprue former with a diameter that is approximately the
same size as the thickest bulk of the wax pattern. If the pattern is
small, the sprue former must also be small because attaching a large
sprue former to a thin, delicate pattern could cause distortion. On
the other hand, if the sprue former’s diameter is too small, it may
solidify before the casting itself, and localized shrinkage porosity (“suck-back” porosity) may develop. As shown in Figure 14-3,
reservoir sprues are used to help overcome this problem.

The sprue former should be long enough to position the pattern properly in the casting ring within 6 mm of the trailing end
(Figure 14-2) and yet short enough so that the molten alloy does
not solidify before it fills the mold.
A reservoir should be added to a sprue network to prevent
localized shrinkage porosity (Figure 14-3). When the molten
alloy fills the heated casting ring, the pattern area should solidify
first, and the reservoir last. The molten metal in the reservoir
remains molten to furnish additional liquid alloy into the mold
as it solidifies.
The length of the sprue former depends on the length of the
casting ring. If the sprue is too short, the wax pattern may be so
far removed from the end of the casting ring that gases cannot
be adequately vented to permit the molten alloy to fill the ring
completely. When these gases are not eliminated, the casting will
be incomplete. The sprue length should be adjusted so that the top
of the wax pattern is within 6 mm of the open end of the ring for
gypsum-bonded investments (Figure 14-2) and within 3 to 4 mm
of the top of the phosphate-based investment.

Investment Materials
The material for making the mold must be refractory and thermally stable so that it can withstand exposure to the high temperatures of molten metal as the metal solidifies and cools to room

Sprue Position and Attachment
The sprue-former connection to the wax pattern is generally
flared for higher-density gold alloys but often restricted for lowerdensity alloys. Flaring of the sprue former may act in much the
same way as a reservoir, smoothing the entry of the fluid alloy
into the pattern area with less turbulence. The position of the
sprue-former attachment is often a matter of individual judgment
and intuition, based on the shape and form of the wax pattern. As
indicated earlier, the ideal area for the sprue former is the point of
greatest bulk in the pattern to avoid distorting thin areas of wax
during attachment to the pattern and permit complete flow of the
alloy into the mold cavity.
Then, it is best for the molten alloy to flow from a thick section
to surrounding thin areas (e.g., the margins). The sprue former
should not be attached to a broad, flat surface at a right angle.
Such an orientation leads to turbulence within the mold cavity
and porosity in this region (Figure 14-4, A). When this same pattern is sprued at a 45-degree angle to the proximal area, a satisfactory casting is obtained (Figure 14-4, B).

A

B

• Figure 14-3 Localized shrinkage (pointer) caused by using a sprue diameter thinner than required.

• Figure 14-4 Effect of sprue orientation. A, Detached sprue indicates
severe porosity at the point of attachment because of turbulence caused
by an improper sprue angle. B, Sound casting results with the sprue at
approximately 45 degrees to the proximal wall.

CHAPTER 14

temperature. In addition, the mold or investment material must
not interact chemically with the metal surface, and it must be easy
to remove from the metal casting.
Generally, two types of investments—gypsum-bonded and
phosphate-bonded—are employed, depending on the melting
range of the alloy to be cast. A third type is the ethyl silicate–
bonded investment, which is used principally for the casting of
removable partial dentures made from base metals (cobalt-based
and nickel-based alloys). Because the thermal contraction coefficients of the alloys are higher than that of the investment mold, the
dimension of the prosthesis when cooled to room temperature will
be smaller in dimension than the wax pattern’s intended dimension. The difference of the dimension is called casting shrinkage.
To obtain a prosthesis of the intended dimension, the investment
mold needs to expand during setting and expand more during
burnout to compensate for the casting shrinkage.

Gypsum-Bonded Investments
The gypsum-based materials represent the type traditionally used
for casting gold alloys. There are two classifications by International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 7490 (American
National Standards Institute [ANSI]/American Dental Association [ADA] 126): type 1 is used for casting inlays, onlays, crowns,
or other fixed prostheses, and type 2 is used for removable partial
denture frameworks.

0.4

0.0
Type IV Stone
W/P - .22
0.4

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

309

Composition
The ingredients of gypsum-based investments are α-hemihydrate
of gypsum as binder, polymorphs of silica as fillers, and other
ingredients as modifiers.
The binder holds the filler together and provides the investment strength. When the binder is heated at temperatures sufficiently high to completely dehydrate the investment, it shrinks
considerably, and occasionally fractures. As Figure 14-5 shows,
when the temperature is raised to 200 to 400 °C, it dehydrates and
shrinks. A slight expansion occurs between 400 and 700 °C, and
a large contraction then takes place at higher temperatures, caused
by decomposition of the calcium sulfate. Thus it is imperative that
gypsum investments not be heated above 700 °C.
To compensate for the inherent contraction associated with
gypsum and casting shrinkage, polymorphs of silica are incorporated in the investment. Silica exists in at least four polymorphs:
quartz, tridymite, cristobalite, and fused quartz. When quartz,
tridymite, or cristobalite is heated, a change in crystalline form
occurs at transition temperatures characteristic of each polymorph of silica (Figure 14-6). This crystalline transition is called
an inversion. Each crystalline transition from lower temperature
(α phase) to higher temperature (β phase) is accompanied by a
linear expansion. For example, the inversion completes at 573 °C
for quartz, at 200 and 270 °C for cristobalite, and at 117 and
163 °C for tridymite. In powdered form, the inversions occur
over a temperature range rather than instantaneously at a specific temperature. By the quantity of thermal expansion shown
in Figure 14-6, quartz and cristobalite are of particular dental
interest.
In addition to silica, certain modifying agents, coloring matter,
and reducing agents, such as carbon and powdered copper, are
present. The reducing agents are used to provide a nonoxidizing
atmosphere in the mold when a gold alloy is cast. Some of the
modifiers not only regulate the setting expansion and the setting
time but also prevent most of the shrinkage of gypsum when it is
heated above 300 °C. In some instances, the modifiers are needed
to regulate the setting time and setting expansion, as described for
the dental stones.

Type III Stone
W/P - .30

2.0
Cristobalite

1.2
1.6
Thermal expansion (%)

Expansion (%)

0.8

Plaster
W/P - .50

1.6

2.0

Quartz
1.2
Tridmite
0.8

0.4

2.4

Fused quartz
0.0

2.8
0

200

400

600

800

1000

Temperature (°C)

• Figure 14-5 Dimensional change of three forms of gypsum when heated. (Courtesy R. Neiman, Whip Mix Corporation, Louisville, KY.)

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Temperature (°C)

• Figure 14-6 Thermal expansion of four polymorphs of silica. (Courtesy
R. Neiman, Whip Mix Corporation, Louisville, KY.)

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Setting Expansion
Typically, the setting expansion of these investments is controlled
by retarders and accelerators for the gypsum. The exothermic
heat of gypsum setting can result in expansion of the wax pattern
before the investment sets, influencing the effective setting expansion. The expansion of the investment may cause distortion of
the wax pattern. Consider a mesio-occulso-distal (MOD) restoration as an example; the investment inside of MOD can force the
proximal walls of the wax pattern outward as it sets. If the pattern
has a thin wall, the effective setting expansion is somewhat greater
than that for a pattern with thicker walls because the investment
can move the thinner wall more readily. Also, the softer the wax,
the greater the effective setting expansion because the softer wax
is more readily deformed by the expanding investment. If a softer
wax is used, the setting expansion may cause excessive distortion
of the pattern.
Hygroscopic Setting Expansion
As illustrated in Figure 14-7, the hygroscopic setting expansion
may be six or more times greater than the normal setting expansion of a dental investment. If greater expansion is needed, there
are many factors in the control of hygroscopic expansion.
The magnitude of hygroscopic setting expansion is generally proportional to the silica content of the investment, which
becomes greater with a finer size of silica. Filler plays no role in
hygroscopic expansion; it is the interface between filler and gypsum that allows added water to diffuse through the setting material and increased expansion.
As discussed for gypsum products, the higher the water/powder (W/P) ratio of the original investment water mixture, the less
the hygroscopic setting expansion. As the mixing time is reduced,
the hygroscopic expansion is decreased. The older the investment,
the lower is its hygroscopic expansion. The greatest amount of
hygroscopic setting expansion is observed if the immersion takes
place before the initial set. The longer the immersion of the investment in the water bath is delayed beyond the time of the initial

set of the investment, the lower the hygroscopic expansion. The
effects of the W/P ratio, mixing, and shelf life on the maximal
hygroscopic setting expansion are illustrated in Figure 14-8 relative to the amount of water added during setting.

Thermal Expansion
The effect of cristobalite compared with that of quartz is demonstrated in Figure 14-9. Because of the much greater expansion that
occurs during the inversion of cristobalite, the normal contraction of gypsum during heating is readily eliminated. Furthermore,
the expansion occurs at a lower temperature because of the lower

A

1.6

B
1.4
Linear expansion (%)

310

C

1.2

D

Less spatulation
Aged investment

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

Water added (mL)

• Figure 14-8 Relationship of linear hygroscopic setting expansion and
amount of water added as influenced by certain manipulative factors. (Data
from Asgar K, Mahler DB, Peyton FA: Hygroscopic technique for inlay casting using controlled water additions, J Prosthet Dent 5:711–724, 1955.)

1.2
B

Cristobalite
Containing
Investment

1.6
1.0
1.4
Thermal expansion (%)

Setting expansion (%)

Thinner mix

1.0

1.8

1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4

0

10

20
Time (min)

30

0.8
0.6
25% Plaster +
75% Quartz
Investment

0.4
0.2

A

0.2
0.0

Average mix

40

• Figure 14-7 Setting expansion and hygroscopic expansion of a gypsumbonded investment. A, Normal setting expansion of dental investment.
B, Hygroscopic setting expansion. The investment was immersed in water
5 minutes after the beginning of mixing; the water/powder ratio was 0.30.

0.0
0

100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
Temperature (°C)

• Figure 14-9 Thermal expansion of an investment that contains 25%
plaster of Paris and 75% quartz (red) and an investment that contains
cristobalite rather than quartz (brown). (Courtesy Dr. George Paffenbarger.)

CHAPTER 14

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

311

strength should not be unduly high. When the alloy is still hot
and weak, the investment can resist alloy shrinkage by virtue of its
strength and constant dimensions. This can cause distortion and
even fracture of the casting if the hot strength of the alloy is low.

+1.0
+.9

W/P = .30
+.8

Porosity of Set Investment
As the molten metal enters the mold under pressure during casting, the trapped air must be forced out ahead of the inflowing
metal. If the air is not completely expelled, a back pressure builds
up to prevent the molten alloy from completely filling the mold.
The simplest method for venting the mold is through the pores of
the investment. Thus it is important that the end of a wax pattern
that is nearest to the end of the investment ring not be covered by
more than 6 mm of investment to allow sufficient interconnectivity of the porous network for the escape of gas from the mold
cavity during filling of the mold with molten metal.

+.7

W/P = .40
+.6

Expansion (%)

+.5

W/P = .50

+.4
+.3
+.2
+.1
0
-.1
-.2
0
32

100
212

200
392

300
572

400
752

500 600 700 800 900
932 1112 1292 1472 1652

°C
°F

Temperature

• Figure 14-10 Effect of water/powder ratio on the thermal expansion of
an investment containing 20% plaster of Paris and 80% quartz. (Courtesy
Dr. George Paffenbarger.)

inversion temperature of the cristobalite in comparison with that of
quartz. A reasonably good fit of the casting is obtained when a gold
alloy is cast into the mold at temperatures of 500 °C and higher.
The thermal expansion curves of an investment provide some idea
of the polymorph of the silica that is present. As can be seen from
Figure 14-9, the investments containing cristobalite expand earlier
and to a greater extent than those containing quartz. Most current
investments are likely to contain both quartz and cristobalite.
The magnitude of thermal expansion is related to the amount
of solids present. This effect is demonstrated by the curves shown
in Figure 14-10. The same figure also shows that it is imperative to
measure the water and powder accurately for proper compensation.
The addition of small amounts of sodium, potassium, or lithium chlorides to the investment eliminates the contraction caused
by gypsum and increases the expansion without the need for an
excessive amount of silica.

Strength
The strength of an investment is usually measured under compressive stress and is increased according to the amount and type of
gypsum binder present. The use of chemical modifiers increases
the strength because more of the binder can be used without a
marked reduction in thermal expansion. The strength of the
investment is affected by the W/P ratio in the same manner as
any other gypsum product; the more water employed during mixing, the lower the compressive strength. After the investment has
cooled to room temperature, its strength decreases considerably,
presumably because of fine cracks that form during cooling.
Although a certain minimal strength is necessary to prevent
fracture of the investment mold during casting, the compressive

Storage
Gypsum-based investments should be stored in airtight and
moisture-proof containers. During use, the containers should be
opened for as short a time as possible. All investments are composed of several ingredients, each of which possesses a different
density. There is a tendency for the components of the investment
to separate as they settle, according to their specific gravity. It is
advisable to purchase prepackaged investments in relatively small
quantities if investments are needed on an infrequent basis.
The investment supplied in bulk packages should be weighed,
and the water should be measured according to the proportion of
the investment mix. In this manner, one can control the setting
or the thermal expansion in relation to the compensation needed
for the casting shrinkage and other important properties. One
need only measure the gauging water.
One should be aware of slight variations in the weight of premeasured packets of powder. The quality control of investment products
is related not only to the homogeneity of particulate components
but also to variations in the weight of powder in the packets.

Phosphate-Bonded Investment
The use of alloys with higher melting temperature ranges, such as
those for metal-ceramic restorations, usually leads to greater thermal contraction after solidification. This necessitates an investment material that is more heat resistant with greater expansion.
Phosphate-based investments are designed primarily for alloys
used to produce copings or frameworks for metal-ceramic prostheses and some base-metal alloys (Chapter 9, Manipulation of
Base Metal Alloys).

Composition
Phosphate-based investments contain refractory fillers and a
binder. The silica filler is typically 80% by weight. The particle
size varies from submicron to that of a fine sand. The binder consists of magnesium oxide (basic) and monoammonium phosphate
(acidic). A colloidal silica suspension in place of water is used for
mixing phosphate investments.
Setting Reaction
The chemical reaction for the phosphate-based binder system is
as follows:
NH4 H2 PO4  MgO  5H2 O NH4 MgPO4 . 6H2 O.
(1)

312

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

1.4

1.3

700

sion (

xpan
rmal e

Thermal expansion (%)

1.2

The

Expansion (%)

1.0
0.8

ion

ns

g
ttin

a
xp

e

Se

0.6

Special liquid

1.2

) °C
–1000

1.1
1.0

Water

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.4

0.1
0.0
0

0.2

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Temperature (°C)

• Figure 14-12 Thermal expansion of a phosphate-bonded investment

0.0
0

20

40

60

80

100

Liquid concentration (%)

• Figure 14-11 Influence of liquid concentration on the setting and ther-

mixed with water compared with the “special liquid.” (Courtesy R. Neiman,
Whip Mix Corporation, Louisville, KY.)

mal expansion of a phosphate-bonded investment. (Courtesy R. Neiman,
Whip Mix Corporation, Louisville, KY.)

Mechanical mixing under vacuum is preferred. The liquid/powder
(L/P) ratio also affects the working and setting time; an increase in
the L/P ratio increases the working time.

The reaction product is predominantly colloidal multimolecular (NH4MgPO4.6H2O)n aggregate around excess MgO
and fillers. On heating, the binder of the set investment undergoes thermal reactions that appear to be the decomposition of
(NH4MgPO4.6H2O)n. It begins to lose water around 50 °C and
dehydrates to (NH4MgPO4.H2O)n at 160 °C. Further heating
to 300 to 650 °C expels the remaining water and ammonia
from the phosphate compound and results in a noncrystalline
polymeric phase of (Mg2P2O7)n. As the temperature increases,
the noncrystalline phase begins to crystalize. The resulting reaction products of phosphate-bonded investments are crystalline
Mg2P2O7, excess MgO, and essentially unchanged silicas. In
addition, Mg3(P2O4)2 may be formed if the investment is grossly
overheated above 1040 °C or if the molten metal contacts the
mold-cavity surfaces.

Surface Quality of Cast Metals
The detail reproduction and surface smoothness of a metal-ceramic
gold cast in a phosphate-bonded investment are considered inferior to those of a conventional gold alloy cast in a gypsum-bonded
investment. Increasing the ratio of “special liquid” to water used
for the mix enhances casting surface smoothness but can lead to
oversized castings. Improvements in the technique and the composition of phosphate-bonded investments now make it possible
to fabricate castings having few surface imperfections on low-fusing gold alloy, high-fusing gold alloy, or base-metal alloy.

Setting and Thermal Expansion
The setting reaction yields a slight expansion, which can be
increased considerably by using a colloidal silica solution (special
liquid) instead of water. Figure 14-11 shows the effect of the concentration of colloidal silica in aqueous suspension on the setting
and thermal expansion. Figure 14-12 shows the thermal expansion of a typical phosphate investment mixed with water compared with the same investment mixed with its accompanying
special liquid. The early thermal shrinkage of phosphate investments is associated with decomposition of the binder, magnesium
ammonium phosphate, and is accompanied by the evolution of
ammonia, which is readily apparent by its odor.
Working and Setting Time
The working and setting time of phosphate investments are
affected by temperature. The warmer the mix, the faster it sets.
Increased mixing time and mixing efficiency result in a faster
set and a greater rise in temperature. The ideal technique is to
mix as long as possible yet have just enough time for investing.

Ethyl Silicate–Bonded Investment
The binder of ethyl silicate–bonded investments is a silica gel that
reverts to silica (cristobalite) on heating, and the fillers are silicas and magnesium oxide. A colloidal silicic acid is first formed
by hydrolyzing ethyl silicate in the presence of hydrochloric acid,
ethyl alcohol, and water. The reaction, in its simplest form, can be
expressed as follows:
Si  OC 2 H5 4  4H2 O HCl

Si  OH 4  4C 2 H5OH.
(2)
The colloidal sol of silicic acid goes through a condensation
polymerization reaction, forming a three-dimensional (3-D) polysilicic network that interacts with silicas, and magnesium oxide is
a coherent gel of polysilicic acid forms, accompanied by a setting
shrinkage. The addition of magnesium oxide neutralizes acid and
strengthens the gel.
This soft gel is dried at a temperature below 168 °C. During
the drying process, the gel loses alcohol and water to form a concentrated, harder gel. As might be expected, volumetric contraction accompanies drying, which reduces the size of the mold. This
contraction is known as green shrinkage, which is additive to the
setting shrinkage.

CHAPTER 14

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

313

The remaining cast is somewhat fragile because the amount of
binder is quite low, and it is essentially composed of silica. The
wax pattern is formed on a refractory cast and invested in a manner like other investments. However, the process for an ethyl silicate–bonded investment is a little more complicated than that for
the phosphate type, in that care must be exercised during handling
and burnout because flammable alcohol is given off. If the ethyl
silicate–bonded investment is heated to a sufficiently high temperature, some silica converts to quartz and provides added expansion. This type of investment can be heated to between 1090 and
1180 °C and is compatible with the higher-fusing alloys. Its low
setting expansion minimizes distortion.

vibration should be avoided because it can cause solids in the
investment to settle and may lead to free-water accumulation adjacent to the wax pattern, resulting in surface roughness. Excessive
vibration can also dislodge small patterns from the sprue former,
resulting in a miscast.
If the hygroscopic technique is employed, the filled casting
ring is immediately placed in a 37 °C water bath with the crucible former’s side down. For the thermal expansion or high-heat
technique, the invested ring is bench-set undisturbed for the time
recommended by the manufacturer.

Investing Procedure

How does nonuniform investment expansion occur? How can excessive
longitudinal expansion be minimized?

The overall procedures involved in investing and casting are quite
similar for gypsum-based and phosphate-based investment materials; therefore they are described simultaneously. For best results,
the manufacturer’s recommendations for the specific alloy used
should be followed.
A wax-pattern cleaner should be used to remove any debris,
grease, or oils. Excess liquid is shaken off, and the pattern is left
to air-dry while the investment is being prepared. The thin film
of cleanser left on the pattern reduces the surface tension of the
investment mixture, making it “wet” the wax pattern better to
ensure complete coverage of the intricate portions of the pattern.
While the wax pattern cleaner is air-drying, the appropriate
amount of liquid for the investment material is dispensed in a
clean, dry mixing bowl, and the powder is gradually added to the
liquid to minimize air entrapment. Hand spatula mixing is performed gently until all the powder has been wet. Although continuing hand-mixing to completion is an option, it is far more
common to complete mixing mechanically under vacuum.

Vacuum Mixing
Mechanical mixing under vacuum removes the air bubbles created during mixing and evacuates any potentially harmful gases
produced by the chemical reaction of the high-heat investments.
Once mixing is complete, the pattern may be hand invested or
vacuum invested. For investing by hand, the entire pattern is
painted (inside and out) with a thin layer of investment. The casting ring is positioned on the crucible former, and the remainder
of the investment is vibrated slowly into the ring. With vacuum
investing, the same equipment used to mix the investment is
employed to invest the pattern without breaking vacuum.
As noted, the porosity in the investment is reduced by vacuum
investing. As a result, the texture of the cast surface is somewhat
smoother, with better detail reproduction. The tensile strength of
vacuum-mixed investment is also increased. One study found that
95% of vacuum-invested castings were free of nodules, whereas
only 17% of castings made in hand-invested molds were entirely
free of defects. Freedom of any surface imperfections is highly
important because even a small nodule on a casting may damage
a fragile enamel margin when the casting is evaluated for fit in the
prepared cavity, and thus it may not seat completely. The finished
casting should always be checked under magnification for such
defects before fitting it on the die.
Air bubbles that remain in the mix, even with vacuum mixing,
can be entrapped on flat or concave surfaces that are not oriented
suitably for air evacuation. Tilting the ring slightly aids in releasing these bubbles so that they can rise to the surface. Excessive

CRITICAL QUESTIONS

Control of Shrinkage Compensation
Recall the earlier discussion of controlling casting shrinkages by
either setting (includes hygroscopic) expansion or the thermal
expansion of the investment. Both techniques are currently in use
and are commonly termed the hygroscopic expansion (low-heat)
method and the thermal expansion (high-heat) method. As their names
alone might indicate, the high-heat method requires thermal expansion of the investment to occur between room temperature and a
high temperature (650 to 700 °C for gypsum-bonded investments,
and up to 1030 °C for phosphate-bonded investments). With the
low-heat method, the hygroscopic expansion of the investment is
responsible for mold enlargement, and the mold is heated between
482 and 510 °C for casting high-noble crown and bridge alloys.
Occasionally, it may be desirable to alter the mold dimensions
of a full cast crown compared with a small inlay. Additional steps
can be taken to expand the ability to compensate for the inherent
casting shrinkage.

Casting Ring Liner
With the use of solid metal rings or casting flasks, provisions must
be made to permit investment expansion in the nonaxial (radial)
direction. The mold may become smaller rather than larger because
of the reverse pressure resulting from the confinement of the setting
expansion. This effect can be overcome by using a split ring or flexible rubber ring that permits the setting expansion of the investment.
However, the most commonly used technique to provide
investment expansion is to line the walls of the unsplit casting ring
with a liner. Traditionally, asbestos was the material of choice, but
it can no longer be used because its carcinogenic potential makes
it a biohazard. Two types of nonasbestos ring liner materials have
been produced: an aluminosilicate ceramic liner and a cellulose
(paper) liner.
To ensure uniform expansion, the clinician or technician cuts
the liner to fit the inside diameter of the casting ring with no overlap. The dry liner is tacked in position with sticky wax, and it is
then used either dry or wet. With a wet liner technique, the lined
ring is immersed in water for a time, and the excess water is shaken
away. Squeezing the liner should be avoided because this leads to
variable amounts of water removal and nonuniform expansion.
Although a ceramic liner may not absorb as much water as a cellulose liner, the ceramic liner’s network of fibers can retain water
on the surface.
The liner affords greater radial setting expansion in the investment, and the absorbed water causes a semihygroscopic expansion
as it is drawn into the investment during setting, as shown for

314

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

B

Hygroscopic
expansion

1.4

Expansion (%)

1.2
1.0

Two asbestos liners

D

Semihygroscopic
expansion

0.8

C
One asbestos liner

0.6
0.4

Normal setting
expansion

0.2

A

0.0
0

15

30

45

60

75

90

105

120

Time (min)

• Figure 14-13 Effect of liner and setting condition on the setting expansion. A, Normal setting. B, Hygroscopic expansion of an investment compared with the somewhat restricted expansion that occurs in an inlay ring
containing one liner (C) or two liners (D). (Courtesy R. Neiman, Whip Mix
Corporation, Louisville, KY.)

gypsum investments in Figure 14-13. The use of one liner (C in
Figure 14-13) increases the normal setting expansion compared
with no liner. Using a thicker liner material or two layers of liner
(D in Figure 14-13) provides even greater semihygroscopic expansion and affords a more unrestricted normal setting expansion
of the investment. As shown in Figure 14-13, two layers of liner
can be used to increase the expansion slightly compared with that
obtained from one liner. In any case, the thickness of the liner
should not be less than approximately 1 mm.
Because cellulose liners are paper products, they are burned
away during the burnout procedure, and a technique must be
found to secure the investment in the ring. However, the desired
length of the liner remains a matter of controversy. If the length
of the liner is somewhat shorter than that of the ring itself, the
investment will be confined at one or both ends of the ring.
The longitudinal setting and hygroscopic expansion are thereby
restricted compared with an arrangement where the liner is flush
with the ends of the ring.
The expansion of the investment is always greater in the unrestricted longitudinal direction than in the radial direction—that
is, toward the inside of the ring. Therefore it is desirable to reduce
the expansion in the longitudinal direction. Placing the liner
somewhat short (Figure 14-2) of the ends of the ring tends to
produce a more uniform expansion; thus there is less chance for
distortion of the wax pattern and the mold.

Altering Liquid/Powder Ratio
As previously discussed, two liners allow for greater setting and
thermal expansion than does a single liner (Figure 14-13). Also,
the setting, hygroscopic, and thermal expansions of investments
can be controlled to a certain extent by varying the L/P ratio of
the investment. The lower the L/P ratio, the greater the potential
for investment expansion. Conversely, thinner mixes reduce the
expansion. With some investments, however, the effect of minor
adjustments to the L/P ratio are insignificant.

There is a limit as to how much the L/P ratio can be altered. If
the mix is too thick, it cannot be applied to the pattern without a
likelihood of distorting the pattern and producing air voids during
investing. On the other hand, if the mixture is too thin, a rough
surface on the casting may be the result.
Another possible problem is too much expansion of the mold
when the thermal expansion technique is used with a cristobalite
investment. A thermal expansion of 1.3% may take place. If an
effective setting expansion of 0.3% to 0.4% is added to such a
thermal expansion, a total linear expansion as high as 1.7% may
be obtained, higher than the average thermal casting shrinkage of
a gold alloy. As a result, a cast crown may be too large.
In addition to controlling the hygroscopic expansion by
the L/P ratio, expansion can be regulated by reducing the time
of immersion of the setting investment or by controlling the
amount of water to be added during the setting process. The
longer the delay before the investment is immersed in the water
bath, the less the amount of hygroscopic expansion that can
occur.
The modern hygroscopic investment technique generally provides the precise expansion needed for most types of patterns.
However, some patterns may require a variation in expansion.
Using higher burnout and water-bath temperatures increases the
expansion, and vice versa.

Controlled Water-Added Technique
The linear hygroscopic expansion increases directly with the
amount of water added until maximum expansion is attained.
The compositions of investments used with the water-added
hygroscopic casting technique ensure maximal expansion during immersion in water. The amount of hygroscopic expansion
needed for compensation is then obtained by adding only enough
water to provide the desired expansion.
A soft, flexible rubber ring is used instead of the usual lined
metal ring. The pattern is invested as usual. A specified amount
of water is then added on top of the investment in the rubber
ring, and the investment can set, usually at room temperature. The
controlled water-added technique is rarely used, however, because
the hygroscopic expansion method described earlier provides adequate expansion in most cases.

Casting Procedure
Once the investment has set for an appropriate period—approximately at least 1 hour for most gypsum- and phosphate-bonded
investments—it is ready for burnout. The procedures for the two
types of investments are similar, so the following discussion focuses
on gypsum investments. The crucible former and any metal sprue
formers are carefully removed. Any debris from the ingate area
(funneled opening at the end of the ring) is cleaned with a brush.
If the burnout procedure does not immediately follow the investing procedure, the invested ring is placed in a humidor at 100%
humidity. If possible, the investment should not be permitted to
dry out. Rehydration of a set investment that has been stored for
an extended period may not replenish all the lost water.

Wax Elimination and Heating
The invested rings are placed in a room-temperature furnace and
heated to the prescribed maximum temperature. For gypsumbonded investments, this temperature can be either 500 °C for
the hygroscopic technique or 700 °C for the thermal expansion

CHAPTER 14

technique. With phosphate-bonded investments, the maximum
temperature setting may range from 700 to 1030 °C, depending on the type of alloy selected. The temperature setting is more
critical for gypsum-bonded investments than for the phosphate
type because the gypsum investments are more prone to thermal decomposition. During burnout, some of the melted wax
is absorbed by the investment, and residual carbon produced by
ignition of the liquid wax becomes trapped in the porous investment. It is also advisable to begin the burnout procedure while
the mold is still wet. Water trapped in the pores of the investment reduces the absorption of wax, and as the water vaporizes,
it flushes wax from the mold. This process is facilitated by placing
the ring with the sprue hole down over a slot in a ceramic tray
in the burnout furnace. When the high-heat technique is used,
the mold temperature generates enough heat to convert carbon to
either carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide. These gases can then
escape through the pores in the heated investment.

Hygroscopic Low-Heat Technique
Hygroscopic expansion of gypsum-bonded investment molds was
described earlier in this chapter. This technique obtains its compensation expansion from three sources: (1) the 37 °C water bath
expands the wax pattern, (2) the warm water entering the investment mold from the top adds some hygroscopic expansion, and
(3) the expansion at 500 °C provides the needed thermal expansion. The low-heat technique offers the advantages of less investment degradation, a cooler surface for smoother castings, and the
convenience of placing the molds directly into a preheated 500 °C
furnace. The last benefit makes it possible to keep one or more
furnaces at the burnout temperature so that molds may be put in
as they are ready. This is particularly useful in large laboratories
where molds are ready for burnout at various times. Care must
nevertheless be taken to allow enough burnout time because the
wax is more slowly oxidized (eliminated) at the lower temperature.
The molds should remain in the furnace for at least 60 minutes,
and they may be held up to 5 hours or longer with little damage.
Because the temperature of the furnace is lowered each time a
mold is placed, extra time should be allowed to ensure complete
wax elimination when molds are placed at intervals. Even though
the mold is usually held at this temperature for 60 to 90 minutes,
enough residual fine carbon may be retained to reduce the venting
of the mold. Because of this potential for reduced venting, backpressure porosity is a greater hazard in the low-heat technique
than in the high-heat technique because the investments generally
employed with the low-heat technique may be denser.
The standardized hygroscopic technique was developed for
alloys with a high gold content; the newer noble alloys may require
slightly more expansion. This added expansion may be obtained
by making one or more of the following changes:
Increasing the water bath temperature to 40 °C
Using two layers of liner
Increasing the burnout temperature to a range of 600 to
650 °C

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

315

wet liner adds a small amount of hygroscopic expansion to the
normal setting expansion.

Casting Metal in Gypsum Investments
These casting investments are relatively fragile and require the use
of a metal ring for protection during heating. The molds are usually placed in a furnace at room temperature, slowly heated to 650
to 700 °C in 60 minutes, and held for 15 to 30 minutes at the
upper temperature.
The rate of heating has some influence on the smoothness and,
in some instances, the overall dimensions of the investment. Initially, rapid heating can generate steam, which can cause flaking
or spalling of the mold walls. Too many patterns in the same plane
within the investment often cause separation of a whole section
of investment. This is because the expanding wax creates excessive
pressure over a large area.
Too rapid of a heating rate may also cause cracking of the
investment. In such a case, the outside layer of the investment
expands much more than the center sections. Consequently, the
outside layer starts to expand thermally, resulting in compressive
stress in the outside layer, which counteracts tensile stresses in
the middle regions of the mold. Such a stress distribution causes
the brittle investment to crack from the interior outward in the
form of radial cracks. These cracks, in turn, produce a casting with
fins or spines like those shown in Figure 14-14. This condition is
likely to be present with a cristobalite investment. The comparatively low inversion temperature of cristobalite and the rapid rate
of expansion during inversion make it especially important to heat
the investment slowly.
Breakdown of the dental investment and the resulting contamination and brittleness of the gold alloy casting probably occur more frequently than is generally realized. The mechanism of this investment
decomposition and alloy contamination is related to a chemical reaction between the residual carbon and calcium sulfate binder. Calcium

High-Heat Thermal Expansion Technique
This approach depends almost entirely on using a high-heat burnout to obtain the required expansion, while at the same time eliminating the wax pattern. Additional expansion results from the
slight heating of gypsum investments on setting, thus expanding
the wax pattern, and the water entering the investment from the

• Figure 14-14 Fins (arrows) on the surface of a casting that formed as a
result of cracks in the investment before casting of the metal.

316

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

sulfate per se does not decompose unless heated above 1000 °C. However, the reduction of calcium sulfate by carbon takes place rapidly
above 700 °C, in accordance with the following reactions:
CaSO4  4C CaS  4CO,
(3)
3CaSO4  CaS  4CaO  4SO2 .
(4)
This reaction takes place whenever gypsum investments are
heated above 700 °C in the presence of carbon. The sulfur dioxide
as a product of this reaction contaminates gold castings and makes
them extremely brittle. This fact emphasizes the need to eliminate
the wax during heating.
After the casting temperature has been reached, the casting
should be made immediately. Maintaining a high temperature for
a considerable length of time may result in sulfur contamination
of the casting and a rough surface on the casting because of the
disintegration of the investment. To avoid this problem, some
technicians use furnaces with heating elements on all four sides,
thereby reducing the burnout time.
Despite all these precautions and reasons for using a slow
burnout technique, the desire for rapid results has led to improved
investment formulations. A few gypsum investments, some with a
considerable amount of cristobalite, are now offered for use with
a much more rapid burnout procedure. Some suggest placing
the mold in a furnace at 315 °C for 30 minutes, and following
this with very rapid heating to the final burnout temperature. In
addition, a few investments may be placed directly into a furnace
at the final burnout temperature, held for 30 minutes, and cast.
Because of furnace design, the proximity of the mold to the heating element, and the availability of air in the muffle, the size and
smoothness may be affected. It is advisable to consider these factors carefully before a casting is made in this manner.

Casting in Phosphate Investments
Phosphate investments obtain their expansion from the following
sources:
1. Expansion of the wax pattern—This is considerable because
the setting reaction raises the mold temperature substantially.
2. Setting expansion—This is usually higher than in gypsum
investments, especially because special liquids may be used to
increase such expansion.
3. Thermal expansion—This is greater when taken to temperatures higher than those used for gypsum-bonded investments.
A total expansion of 2% or more may be required for alloys
used to produce metal-ceramic prostheses because these alloys
have higher melting and solidification temperatures. Although
phosphate investments are usually much harder and stronger than
gypsum investments, they are nevertheless quite brittle and are
subject to the same unequal expansion of adjacent sections, as
phase changes occur during heating.
The usual burnout temperatures for phosphate-bonded investments range from 750 to 1030 °C. The highest temperatures are
required for base-metal alloys. The heating rate is usually slow to
315 °C and is quite rapid thereafter, reaching completion after
a hold at the upper temperature for 30 minutes. Most burnout
furnaces are capable of being programmed for heating rates and
holding times.

The procedure for investing a wax pattern in a phosphatebonded investment is essentially the same as that for a gypsumbonded investment. As previously mentioned, the working time
can vary depending on the L/P ratio, special liquid concentration, temperature, mixing time, mixing rate, and operator skill
and experience.
As with any investment that has a high thermal expansion,
especially when marked changes in expansion or contraction
occur, it is necessary to use a slow heating rate during burnout
to prevent possible cracking or spalling. Most modern burnout
furnaces are capable of being programmed for heating rates and
holding times. For those that are not, it is advisable to use a twostage burnout, holding at 200 to 300 °C for at least 30 minutes
before completing the burnout. Recommendations for the rate of
heating vary, so it is wise to follow the instructions for the specific
investment used.
Although phosphate investments appear strong, they are still
susceptible to disrupting influences during burnout. When the
wax softens, it expands much more than does the investment.
When investing, it is desirable to leave 3 to 6 mm of investment around each pattern and to stagger the patterns if several
are placed in the same ring. Several patterns positioned along
a plane can exert tremendous pressure and fracture almost any
investment, but particularly the phosphate-bonded materials. The rapid expansion of cristobalite investment at approximately 300 °C requires slow heating to prevent fracture. After
the temperature reaches 400 °C, the rate of heating can be
safely increased. After burnout, usually at a final temperature
of 700 to 1030 °C depending on the alloy melting range, the
casting is made. The permeability of the phosphate investment
is low compared with that of a gypsum-bonded investment.
Therefore the required casting pressure is greater than that for
a gypsum mold.
Recovery and cleaning of the casting are more difficult when
a phosphate-bonded investment is used. Also, the particles usually include large grains of quartz. In some instances, such as with
gold-containing alloys, the investment adheres rather tenaciously,
usually requiring cleaning in an ultrasonic device. Neither the
phosphate binder nor the silica refractory is soluble in HCl or
H2SO4. Cold hydrofluoric acid (HF) dissolves the silica refractory
quite well without damage to a gold-based or a palladium-silver
alloy, but this acid must be used carefully with other alloys. Even
dilute HF should not be used unless the necessary neutralizing
solutions are immediately at hand and the clinician is familiar
with the correct handling techniques. Caution: once the user’s
tissues are injured, the damage cannot be reversed. Alternative
commercially available solutions can be used with greater safety.
Base-metal alloys require a light grit-blasting, usually with fine
alumina. Cobalt-chromium-based partial dentures are usually
sandblasted to remove the investment. Acid should not be used
for cleaning base-metal alloys.
The selection of the appropriate phosphate-bonded investment
must be based on the composition of the alloy to be used. Carboncontaining investments are well suited for gold-based crown and
bridge casting alloys and metal-ceramic alloys. However, if the
alloy is carbon-sensitive (such as with Ag-Pd, high-Pd, Pd-Ag, NiCr-Be, Ni-Cr, and Co-Cr alloys), a noncarbon investment should
be used.
Because the entire process involving phosphate investments
is lengthy, the demand for time-saving changes is strong. Investment manufacturers have answered this demand, resulting in
the availability of investments that can be subjected to two-stage

CHAPTER 14

heating more rapidly by being placed directly in the furnace at
the top temperature, held for 20 to 30 minutes, and then cast.
To save more time, manufacturers also offer ringless investment;
no metal ring or liner is needed. However, a reusable plastic ring
is still required during the investing procedure. The plastic ring
is tapered so that once the investment has set, it can be pushed
out of the ring, held for a specified time to ensure complete setting, and then placed directly into the hot furnace. Obviously, the
expansion on setting for this method is different from that when
a lined ring is used, and changes in overall fit must be considered.
The required expansion may be adjusted by varying the liquid
concentration.

Time Allowable for Casting
An investment contracts thermally as it cools after casting. When
the thermal expansion or high-heat technique is used, the investment loses heat after the heated ring is removed from the furnace
and the mold contracts. Because of the liner and the low thermal
conductivity of the investment, a short time can elapse before the
temperature of the mold is appreciably affected. Under average
conditions of casting, approximately 1 minute can pass without a
noticeable loss in dimension.
In the low-heat casting technique, the temperature gradient
between the investment mold and the room is not as great as
that employed with the high-heat technique. Also, the thermal
expansion of the investment is not as important to the shrinkage
compensation. However, the burnout temperature lies on a steep
portion of the thermal expansion curve rather than on a plateau
portion, as in the high-heat technique. Therefore in the low-heat

• Figure 14-15 Centrifugal casting machine, spring-wound.

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

317

casting technique, the alloy should also be cast soon after removal
of the ring from the oven; otherwise, a significant variation from
the desired casting dimensions may occur.

Casting Machines
Each casting machine must perform two essential functions: metal
melting and delivery of liquid metal to a casting ring. Metals can
be melted by torch flame, electrical resistance heating, induction
vacuum-arc, or laser beam. Liquid metal can be delivered by centrifuge, gravity, or vacuum or subjected to additional pressure to force
the alloy into the mold. The following subsections describe four
typical casting machines used in dentistry. It is important to follow
the manufacturer’s directions precisely for any of these devices.

Torch Melting/Centrifugal Casting Machine
The casting-machine spring is first wound from two to five turns
(depending on the alloy). The alloy is melted by a torch flame in a
glazed ceramic crucible attached to the “broken arm” of the casting machine (Figure 14-15). The torch flame is generated from
a gas mixture of propane and air, natural gas and air, acetylene
and air, or acetylene and oxygen. Once the metal has reached the
casting temperature and the heated casting ring is in position, the
machine is released, and the spring initiates a rotational motion.
Electrical Resistance–Heated Casting Machine
In this device, current is passed through a resistance heating coil,
melting the alloy in a graphite or ceramic crucible. The advantage of the design is that the crucible in the furnace is located
flush against the casting ring (Figure 14-16). Therefore the alloy

• Figure 14-16 Spring-wound casting machine with electrical resistance
melting furnace.

318

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

remains molten slightly longer, again ensuring that solidification
progresses completely from the tip of the casting to the button
surface.

alloys, vacuum arc heated-argon pressure casting machines are
required.

Induction Melting Machine
With this unit, the alloy is melted by an induction field that develops within a crucible surrounded by water-cooled metal tubing
(Figure 14-17). The electric induction furnace is a transformer
in which alternating current flows through the primary winding
coil and generates a variable magnetic field in the location of the
alloy to be melted in a crucible. Once the alloy reaches the casting
temperature in air or in a vacuum, it is forced into the mold by
centrifugal force, air pressure, or vacuum. Induction melting is
more commonly used with base-metal alloys.

Additional Variables Associated With Casting

Direct-Current Arc Melting Machine
The direct-current arc is produced between two electrodes in
an argon environment: the alloy and the water-cooled tungsten
electrode. The temperature within the arc exceeds 4000 °C, and
the alloy melts very quickly. However, this method poses a high
risk of overheating the alloy, and damage may result after only
a few seconds of prolonged heating. For titanium and titanium

A

Casting Crucibles
Generally, four types of casting crucibles are available: clay, carbon, quartz, and zirconia-alumina. Clay crucibles are appropriate
for many of the crown and bridge alloys, such as the high-noble
and low-noble types. Carbon crucibles can be used not only for
high-noble crown and bridge alloys but also for the higher-fusing
gold-based metal-ceramic alloys.
Crucibles made from alumina, quartz, or silica are recommended for high-fusing alloys of any type. These are especially
suited for alloys that have a high melting temperature or those that
are sensitive to carbon contamination. Crown and bridge alloys
with a high palladium content, such as palladium-silver alloys for
metal-ceramic copings and any of the nickel-based or cobalt-based
alloys, are included in this category.
Torch Melting of Noble-Metal Alloy
Noble-metal alloy is best melted by placing it on the inner sidewall
of the crucible. Thus the operator can better observe the progress
of the melting, and there is a better opportunity for any gases in
the flame to be reflected from the surface of the alloy rather than
being absorbed.
The fuel used in most instances is a mixture of natural or artificial gas and air, although oxygen and acetylene combinations
can also be used. The temperature of the gas–air flame is greatly
influenced by the nature of the gas and the proportions of gas and
air in the mixture. Care should be taken to obtain a nonluminous
brush flame with the different combustion zones clearly differentiated. Two types of flames can be obtained with a casting torch,
as shown in Figure 14-18. The air supply for the lower flame is
excessive so that incomplete combustion and a lower temperature
will result. This type of flame is likely to be favored by the beginner because the roaring sound that accompanies this flame adjustment “sounds” hot. The upper brush flame indicates the proper
adjustment for maximal efficiency and temperature.

B
• Figure 14-17 Induction melting casting machine. A, Water-cooled induction coil. B, Vertical crucible (white area) positioned within the induction coil.

• Figure 14-18 Two types of nonluminous flames showing combustion
areas. The upper flame should be employed for fusing noble-metal alloys.
The lower flame results from too much air in the mixture.

CHAPTER 14

The parts of the gas–air flame can be identified by the conical
areas in Figure 14-18. The first long cone emanating directly from
the nozzle is the zone in which the air and gas are mixed before
combustion. No heat is present in this zone. The next cone, which
is green and immediately surrounding the inner cone, is known
as the combustion zone. Here, the gas and air are partially burned.
This zone is oxidizing and should always be kept away from the
molten alloy during fusion.
The next zone, dimly blue and located just beyond the tip of
the green combustion zone, is the reducing zone. This is the hottest part of the flame, and it should be kept constantly on the
alloy during melting. The outer cone (oxidizing zone) is the area
in which combustion occurs with the oxygen in the air. Under no
circumstances should this portion of the flame be used to melt the
alloy. Not only is its temperature lower than that of the reducing
zone, but it also oxidizes the alloy.
With a little practice, the technician or clinician can readily detect whether the proper zone of the flame is in contact
with the metal by observing the condition of the alloy surface.
When the reducing zone is in contact, the surface of the gold
alloy is bright and mirrorlike, as indicated in Figure 14-19, A.
When the oxidizing portion of the flame is in contact with the
alloy, a dull film of “dross” develops over the surface, as shown
in Figure 14-19, B. Although care should be taken not to overheat the alloy, there is generally more likelihood of underheating when the gas–air flame is used. The alloy first appears to
be spongy, and then small globules of fused alloy appear. The
molten alloy soon assumes a spheroidal shape, as indicated in
Figure 14-19, A. At the proper casting temperature, the molten
alloy is light orange and tends to spin or follow the flame when
the latter is moved slightly. At this point, the alloy should be
approximately 38 to 66 °C above its liquidus temperature. The
casting should be made immediately when the proper temperature is reached. As previously discussed, various devices are also
available for melting the alloy electrically.
It is desirable to use a flux for gold crown and bridge alloys to
aid in minimizing porosity. When properly used, the flux increases
the fluidity of the alloy, and the film of flux formed on the surface of the molten alloy helps prevent oxidation, absorbs contaminants, and is left behind at the moment of casting. Reducing
fluxes containing powdered charcoal are often used, but small bits
of carbon may be carried into the mold and cause a deficiency at
a critical margin. Although such reducing fluxes are excellent for
cleaning old alloy, a better flux for the casting procedure may be
made from equal parts of fused borax powder ground with boric
acid powder. The boric acid aids in retaining the borax on the
surface of the alloy. The flux is added when the alloy is completely
melted and should be used with both old and new alloy. Old
sprues and buttons from the same alloy may be recast if they are
not contaminated.

Melting of Base Metals
Although torch melting can be used in some cases, most base
metals of Ni-Cr, Ni-Cr-Be, Co-Cr, Co-Cr-Mo, Co-Ni-Cr, commercially pure Ti, and Ti-Al-V require special melting equipment,
such as induction melting machines, vacuum melting devices,
or arc melting units. The procedures required are designed to
minimize the risk for excessive oxidation or an interaction of the
molten alloys with the recommended casting investments. It is
beyond the scope of this book to discuss these methods; the reader
is referred to specialized instruction manuals developed by the
manufacturers of these products.

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

319

A

B
• Figure 14-19 Effect of the flame zone on melting. A, A mirrorlike surface
of the metal indicates that the reducing zone of the flame is in contact with
the metal. B, A cloudy surface indicates that the oxidizing portion of the
flame is in contact with the metal surface oxidation because of improper
positioning of the torch flame.

Cleaning the Casting
When a Type 3 or 4 gold alloy has been cast and has solidified, the
ring should be quenched in water as soon as the button exhibits
a dull-red glow. Two advantages are gained in quenching: (1) the
noble-metal alloy is left in an annealed condition for burnishing,
polishing, and similar procedures (Chapter 2, Gold-Copper System), and (2) when the water contacts the hot investment, a violent reaction ensues, resulting in a soft, granular investment that
is more easily removed.
The surface of the casting often appears dark because of oxides
and tarnish. Such a surface film can be removed by a process
known as pickling, which consists of heating the discolored casting in an acid. Commonly used pickling solution for noble-metal
alloys is a 30% HCl solution. The disadvantage of HCl is that the
fumes from the acid are likely to corrode laboratory metal furnishings. In addition, these fumes are a health hazard and should be
vented via a fume hood. However, the pickling process can be
performed ultrasonically while the prosthesis is sealed in a Teflon

320

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

container. Commercial products based on phosphoric acid, sulfamic acid, and other acids are also available for pickling noblemetal prostheses.
The best method for pickling is to place the casting in a test
tube or dish and pour the acid over it. It may be necessary to
heat the acid, but boiling should be avoided because of the considerable amount of acid fumes involved. After pickling, the acid
is poured off, and the casting is removed. The pickling solution
should be renewed frequently because it is likely to become contaminated after reusing the solution several times.
In no case should the casting be held with metallic tongs,
which can contaminate the casting when both the casting and the
tongs are in contact in the pickling solution. The pickling solution
usually contains small amounts of copper dissolved from previous
castings. When the metallic tongs contact this electrolyte, a small
galvanic cell is created, and copper may be deposited on the casting at the point where the tongs grip it. This copper deposition
extends into the alloy and is a future source for discoloration in
the area.
Gold- and palladium-based metal-ceramic alloys, and basemetal alloys, are generally not pickled if they are to be benchcooled to room temperature before the casting is removed from
the investment.

CRITICAL QUESTION
Why is the marginal fit of cast crowns on a prepared tooth essential to the
long-term clinical success of metal prostheses?

Clinical Evaluation of Casting Fit
Dental castings can be produced in any size (from a denture base
to the smallest inlay). The procedures employed for the construction of small restorations, such as inlays, onlays, crowns,
and endodontic posts, are the primary topic of this chapter. The
fundamental principles are the same, regardless of the size of the
casting, and the techniques differ only in sprue design, type of
investment, and method of melting the alloy.
The casting process is designed to provide a metallic duplication of missing tooth structure, with as much accuracy as
possible. The tolerance limits for the fit and marginal adaptation of a cast restoration are not known. In a clinical study,
10 experienced dentists were asked to evaluate the marginal
adaptation of a group of inlays, using a sharp dental explorer
and radiographs. After the cemented restorations were graded,
they were microscopically measured at the marginal openings
of various areas. For “acceptable” restorations, the mean opening was 21 μm at the occlusal surface and 74 μm at the gingival region, which is not as accessible visually. There was little
agreement among these 10 dentists on the acceptability of the
marginal openings when evaluated by either dental explorers
or radiographs.
The difficulty in detecting small discrepancies at the margins
of cemented restorations is associated with the use of sharp dental explorers that have a relatively large radius of curvature at
the tip compared with the width of margin gaps that are being
evaluated. As shown in Figure 14-20, the tip of this unused new
explorer may not “catch” a 60-μm margin gap, whose width is
the diameter of a human hair, as it traverses along a path perpendicular to the gap. If this explorer tip substantially penetrates a
gap during probing, the fit of a crown, inlay, or onlay will not be

• Figure 14-20 Cross section of an unused dental explorer tip (top) and
a 60-μm hair (×25). (From McLean JW, van Fraunhofer JA: The estimation
of cement film thickness by an in vivo technique, Br Dent J 131:107–111,
1971.)

clinically acceptable. This illustration poses the question of how
readily a hairline gap can be detected by running an explorer
over the margins of the restoration, especially in interdental areas
that must often be probed at a small angle to the surface. It is
obvious that the accuracy of the inlay or crown should be greater
than can be detected by the eye or by the conventional methods
of clinical testing. At the margins of the cemented restoration, a
thin line of cement is always present, even though it may not be
readily visible. Except for resin-based luting materials, the present dental cements are somewhat soluble and can deteriorate in
the oral cavity over time. Thus the less accurate the casting fit
and the greater the amount of cement exposed, the more likely
it is that the cement will degrade. Certainly, a high degree of
accuracy in marginal adaptation of 25 μm or less cannot be guaranteed for all cast restorations. It stands to reason that the more
accurate the fit of the casting, the less the likelihood of leakage,
plaque accumulation on the cement, and secondary caries will
develop later.
Assuming that the wax pattern is satisfactory, the procedure
then becomes a matter of enlarging the mold uniformly and sufficiently to compensate for the thermal casting shrinkage of the
alloy. Theoretically, if the shrinkages of the wax and the alloy are
known, the mold can be expanded enough to compensate for
such shrinkage. Unfortunately, there are variables in the behavior
of the materials and the wax that cannot be precisely controlled.
The overall dimensional accuracy possible with current techniques has not been clearly defined. Thus neither the allowable
tolerance of accuracy in the fit of the casting nor that obtainable
during the casting procedure is known. In the final analysis, the
casting procedure is partly empirical, and previous experience is
very beneficial.
There are many steps in the procedure for which a considerable number of facts are known. In addition, certain variations in
the techniques described here produce equally satisfactory results.
However, any technique involves strict adherence to certain fundamental principles common to all metals. These are the fundamentals emphasized in the following discussion.

CHAPTER 14

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

321

imperfections, such as nodules, that are not characteristic of
the entire surface area. Excessive roughness or irregularities on
the outer surface of the casting necessitate additional finishing
and polishing.
Even under optimal conditions, the surface roughness of the
casting is invariably somewhat greater than that of the wax pattern. The difference is probably related to the particle size of the
investment, and its ability to reproduce the wax pattern in microscopic detail. With proper manipulative techniques, normal
increased roughness in the casting should not be a major factor
in dimensional accuracy. However, improper technique can lead
to a marked increase in roughness and to the formation of surface
irregularities.

• Figure 14-21 Localized shrinkage porosity in the pontic of a three-unit
fixed partial denture caused by delayed solidification and lack of a chill-set
sprue.

Causes of Defective Castings
Seldom is a defect in a casting attributable to factors other than
the carelessness or ignorance of the operator. With present techniques, casting failures should be the exception, not the rule.
Defects in castings can be classified under four headings: (1)
distortion, (2) surface roughness and irregularities, (3) porosity
(Figure 14-21), and (4) incomplete or missing detail. In almost
every instance, defects in castings can be avoided by strict observance of procedures governed by certain fundamental rules and
principles.

Distortion
Any marked distortion of the casting is probably related to a distortion of the wax pattern, as described in Chapter 13, Manipulation of Inlay Wax. The setting and hygroscopic expansions of the
investment may produce a nonuniform expansion of the walls of
the pattern. The gingival margins are forced apart by the mold
expansion, whereas the solid occlusal bar of wax resists expansion
during the early stages of setting. Therefore distortion increases
as the thickness of the pattern decreases. As would be expected,
the lower the setting expansion of the investment, the less the distortion. Generally, this is not a serious problem, but it accounts
for some of the unexplained inaccuracies that may occur in small
castings.

Surface Roughness, Irregularities, and
Discoloration
Surface roughness is defined as finely spaced surface imperfections whose height, width, and direction establish the predominant surface pattern. Surface irregularities are isolated

Air Voids
Small nodules on a casting are caused by air bubbles that become
attached to the pattern during or subsequent to the investing procedure. Such nodules can sometimes be removed if they are not
in a critical area. However, for nodules on margins or on internal
surfaces, the removal of these irregularities might alter the fit of the
casting. As previously noted, the best method to avoid air bubbles
is to use the vacuum investing technique. A wetting agent may be
helpful in preventing the collection of air bubbles on the pattern
surface, but it is by no means a certain remedy. As previously discussed, it is important that the wetting agent be applied in a thin
layer. It is best to air-dry the wetting agent because any excess liquid
dilutes the investment, possibly producing surface irregularities on
the casting.
Water Films
If the wax pattern is slightly moved, jarred, or vibrated after
investing or the painting of the investment does not result in intimate contact of the investment with the pattern, a water film may
form irregularly over the surface. Occasionally, this type of surface
irregularity appears as minute ridges or veins if the investment
becomes separated from the wax pattern.
Liquid/Powder Ratio
The higher the L/P ratio, the rougher the casting. However, if too
little water is used, the investment may be unmanageably thick so
that it cannot be properly applied to the pattern. Air voids may
not be sufficiently removed by vacuum investing.
Foreign Bodies
A rough crucible former with investment debris clinging to it may
roughen the investment on its removal so that bits of investment
are carried into the mold with the molten alloy. Contamination
usually results not only in surface roughness but also in incomplete areas or surface voids.
Surface discoloration and roughness can result from sulfur contamination. An example of this effect may be seen in Figure 14-22,
either from investment breakdown at elevated temperatures or
from a high sulfur content of the torch flame.
Impact of Molten Alloy on the Mold Wall
Occasionally, the molten alloy may fracture or abrade the mold
surface on impact, regardless of its bulk. Abrasion on the mold is
reflected as a raised area on the casting that can prevent complete
seating of the casting. A proper sprue to prevent the direct impact
of the molten metal, at an angle of 90 degrees to the investment
surface, reduces damage to the investment surface, and undesirable turbulence is avoided.

322

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Pattern Position
When several patterns are invested in the same ring, they should
not be placed too close together. The expansion of wax patterns
before the investment sets can bring the patterns too close.

CRITICAL QUESTION
How can the risk of porosity and incomplete castings be minimized?

Porosity
Porosity may occur within the interior region of a casting that
weakens the casting and extends to the external surface as roughness, which may also cause discoloration. There are two sources of
porosity: solidification defects and trapped gases.
Continual feeding of molten metal through the sprue must
occur to make up for the shrinkage of metal volume during solidification. If the sprue freezes in its cross section before this flow is
completed, a localized shrinkage void will occur in the last portion
of the casting that solidifies.
Four types of porosities are shown in Figure 14-23, A & B: (1)
localized shrinkage porosity, (2) microporosity, (3) pinhole porosity, and (4) subsurface porosity. Localized shrinkage generally

• Figure 14-22 A black-coated noble-metal alloy casting resulting from
sulfur contamination or oxidation during alloy melting.

A

B

occurs near the sprue–casting junction, but it may occur anywhere
between dendrites, as shown in Figure 14-23, C, where the last
part of the casting to solidify was between the dendrite branches
as they developed.
Many alloys dissolve or occlude gases while they are molten.
For example, both copper and silver dissolve oxygen in large
amounts in the liquid state. Molten platinum and palladium
have an affinity for hydrogen and oxygen. On solidification, the
absorbed gases are expelled, and pinhole porosity results. The
larger voids may also result from the same cause but also from gas
that is mechanically trapped by the molten metal in the mold or
by gas that is incorporated during the casting procedure. Larger
spherical porosities can also be caused by gas occluded from a
poorly adjusted torch flame or by the use of the mixing or oxidizing zones of the flame rather than the reducing zone. If the alloy
has been used before, these types of porosities can be minimized
by premelting the gold alloy in a graphite crucible or on a graphite
block and correctly adjusting and positioning the torch flame during melting. The porosity that extends to the surface is usually in
the form of small pinpoint holes. When the surface is polished,
additional pinholes are uncovered.
Subsurface porosity occurs on occasion, as shown in Figure
14-23, B. The reasons for such voids are not well understood.
They may be caused by the simultaneous nucleation of solid grains
and gas bubbles at the first moment that the alloy freezes at the
mold walls. This type of porosity can be diminished by controlling
the rate at which the molten metal enters the mold.
Suck-back porosity may also occur externally, usually in the
interior of a crown near the area of the sprue, if a hot spot has
been created by the molten metal impinging from the sprue channel on a point of the mold wall. This hot spot causes the local
region to solidify last and results in suck-back porosity, as shown
in Figure 14-24 (left). Suck-back porosity often occurs at an occlusoaxial line angle or incisoaxial line angle that is not well rounded.
This type of porosity defect can be eliminated by flaring the point
of sprue attachment and reducing the mold–melt temperature
differential—that is, lowering the casting temperature by about
30 °C. Such a result is shown on the right side of Figure 14-24.
Entrapped air bubbles on the inner surface of the casting,
sometimes referred to as back-pressure porosity, can produce large
concave depressions such as those seen in Figure 14-25. This is
caused by the inability of the air in the mold to escape through the
pores in the investment or by the pressure gradient that displaces
the air pocket toward the end of the investment via the molten

C

• Figure 14-23 Localized porosities. A, Microporosity, pinhole porosity, and gas inclusions. Microporosity
voids are irregular in shape, whereas the two other types tend to be spherical; the largest spherical voids
are gas inclusions. B, Subsurface porosity. C, Localized shrinkage porosity. (Courtesy G. Ryge.)

CHAPTER 14

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

323

• Figure 14-24 Examples of suck-back porosity (arrows on the left image). The coping on the left was cast at 1370 °C. The coping on the right
side was cast at 1340 °C. (Courtesy Dr. J. Nielsen.)

• Figure 14-25 Surface irregularity on the cavity side of a casting caused
by back-pressure porosity.

• Figure 14-26 A, Grain structure of an as-cast American Dental Association (ADA) type III noble-metal alloy. B, Same alloy after a homogenization heat treatment at 725 °C for 70 minutes. Pinhole porosity is visible.
(Courtesy B. Hedegard.)

sprue and button. The incidence of entrapped air can be increased
by the use of the dense modern investments.
All castings probably contain a certain amount of porosity, as
exemplified by the photomicrographs shown in Figure 14-26. This
should be minimized because it may adversely affect the physical
properties of the casting. Proper burnout, an adequate mold and
casting temperature, a sufficiently high casting pressure, and a
proper investment L/P ratio can minimize or eliminate entrappedair porosity. It is good practice to make sure that the thickness of
investment between the tip of the pattern and the end of the ring
is not greater than 6 mm (Figure 14-2).

Incomplete Casting
Occasionally, the molten alloy may be prevented from completely
filling the mold because of insufficient venting of the mold and
high viscosity of the melted metal.
Insufficient venting is directly related to the back pressure
exerted by the air in the mold. These failures are usually exemplified by rounded, incomplete margins (Figure 14-27). If the air

• Figure 14-27 Rounded, incomplete margins are evidence of insufficient
casting pressure.

324

PA RT I V

Fabrication of Prostheses

Investment

Casting

Metal

• Figure 14-28 An incomplete casting resulting from incomplete wax
elimination is characterized by rounded margins and a shiny appearance.
Discrepancy

cannot be vented quickly through the investment, the molten
alloy cannot fill the mold before it solidifies. The magnitude of the
casting pressure should be suspected. Casting pressure should be
maintained a few seconds longer to prevent back pressure during
the early stage of solidification.
Residues from incomplete elimination of wax or plastic sprue
may fill the pores in the investment so that the air cannot be vented
completely. An example of a casting failure caused by incomplete
wax elimination is shown in Figure 14-28 and shown schematically in Figure 14-29. Compared with Figure 14-27, the shining
appearance of Figure 14-28 is caused by the strong reducing atmosphere of carbon monoxide left by residual wax.
Casting alloys exhibit varying viscosities and surface tensions
in the molten state, depending on composition and temperature. Both the surface tension and the viscosity of a molten alloy
decrease with temperature increases. Therefore the temperature of
the alloy should be raised higher than its liquidus temperature so
that its viscosity and surface tension are reduced so that the metal
does not solidify prematurely as it enters the mold.

Suggested Readings
Earnshaw R: The effect of casting ring liners on the potential expansion
of a gypsum-bonded investment, J Dent Res 67:1366–1370, 1988.
Total expansion, setting expansion, and thermal expansion of the
investment setting against a smooth dry surface was 1.7%; against
a dry ceramic liner, 1.6% to 1.7%; and against wet cellulose or wet
asbestos, 2.2% to 2.3%. The ceramic liner can be used wet if it is
treated with a surfactant instead of water.
Ito M, Yamagishi T, Oshida Y, et al: Effect of selected physical properties of waxes on investments and casting shrinkage, J Prosthet Dent
75:211–216, 1996.
This study evaluated the relationship between properties of paraffin and dental inlay waxes to casting shrinkage when patterns were
invested with a phosphate-bonded investment. Casting shrinkage
decreased as the flow of the wax pattern increased. If a low-flow
wax or thick pattern is used, the size of the casting ring should be
increased.
Jorgensen KD, Ono T: Distortion of wax crowns, Scand J Dent Res
92:253–256, 1984.
Distortion of wax crowns is enough to reduce the fit of the final
restoration to a degree that is clinically unacceptable. This study

• Figure 14-29 Schematic illustration of an incomplete casting.

Other Causes
Certain surface discolorations and roughness may not be evident when the casting is completed but may appear during
service. For example, various gold alloys—such as brazing
alloys (solders), bits of wire, and mixtures of different casting
alloys—should never be melted together and reused for patient
castings. The resulting mixture would form different phases
that do not possess the proper physical properties needed and
might form a eutectic phase with low corrosion resistance and
discoloration.

suggests that wax pattern distortion may be minimized only by use of
a pattern/die investing technique.
Neiman R, Sarma AC: Setting and thermal reactions of phosphate investments, J Dent Res 59:1478–1485, 1980.
The authors concluded that setting took place through the complex
formation of [NH4MgPO4.6H2O]n, excess reactants, and water, and
that dehydration and thermal reactions led to a sequence of reactions resulting in the formation of [NH4MgPO4.H2O], [Mg2P2O7]n,
Mg2P2O7, and Mg3[PO4]2.
Nomura GT, Reisbick MH, Preston JD: An investigation of epoxy resin
dies, J Prosthet Dent 44:45–50, 1980.
In a comparison of three epoxy die materials with a type IV stone,
full crown epoxy dies were undersized, MOD onlay resin dies were
accurate, and detail reproduction was found to be comparable to the
type IV gypsum. However, only one epoxy material had a hardness
approaching that of the dental stone.
Pieralini AR, Benjamin CM, Ribeiro RF, et al: The effect of coating patterns with spinel-based investment on the castability and porosity of
titanium cast into three phosphate-bonded investments, J Prosthodont
19:517–522, 2010.
The results show that investing technique with coating increased the
castability for all phosphate-bonded investments.

CHAPTER 14

Santos JF, Ballester RY: Delayed hygroscopic expansion of phosphatebonded investments, Dent Mater 3:165–167, 1987.
Delayed hygroscopic expansion occurs when the investment is
immersed in water after setting. Increased time of immersion and an
increase in the special liquid concentration increased the hygroscopic
setting expansion.
Taggart WH: A new and accurate method of making gold inlays, Dent
Cosmos 49:1117–1121, 1907.
The dental “lost wax” process was developed by Taggart, opening the
opportunity to cast accurate restorations in an investment mold.
Tourah A, Moshaverinia A, Chee WW: Effects of setting under air pressure on the number of surface pores and irregularities of dental investment materials, J Prosthet Dent 111:150–153, 2014.

Casting Investments and Casting Procedures

325

Specimens set under positive pressure in a pressure chamber presented fewer surface bubbles than specimens set under atmospheric
pressure. Positive pressure is effective and, therefore, is recommended for both gypsum-bonded and phosphate-bonded investment materials.
Zeltser C, Lewinstein I, Grajower R: Fit of crown wax patterns after
removal from the die, J Prosthet Dent 53:344–346, 1985.
The effects of loading wax patterns before investment was determined. Repetitive loading revealed that the plastic deformation in
wax was less after the second loading than after the first cycle for a
specific load.

Selected Readings (Web Version)
Christensen GJ: Marginal fit of gold inlay castings, J Prosthet Dent
16:297–305, 1966.
In this laboratory study, 10 dentists accepted cemented gold inlays
with a mean occlusal margin opening of 21 μm [range of 2 to 51 μm],
a mean proximal margin opening of 26 μm [range of 9 to 34 μm], and
a gingival margin opening of 74 μm [range of 34 to 119 μm]. Explorer
examination of visually accessible areas was superior to either explorer
or radiographic examination of visually inaccessible areas.
Cooney JP, Caputo AA: Type III gold alloy complete crowns cast
in a phosphate-bonded investment, J Prosthet Dent 46:414–419,
1981.
Marginal fit was superior for castings made in phosphate-bonded
investment; surface roughness was less when cast in the gypsumbonded investment.
Da Silva LJ, Leal MB, Valente MLC, et al: Effect of casting atmosphere
on the marginal deficiency and misfit of Ni-Cr alloys with and without beryllium, J Prosthet Dent 118:83–88, 2017.
Four casting conditions were investigated: flame-torch, induction/
argon, induction/air, and induction/vacuum. The results demonstrated that beryllium-containing alloys cast in an argon atmosphere
exhibited reduced marginal deficiency, and improved marginal adaptation could also be achieved by the torch technique.
Dootz ER, Asgar K: Solidification patterns of single crowns and threeunit bridge castings, Quint Dent Technol 10:299–305, 1986.
Solidification rates and patterns differed for type III gold alloy and a
palladium-silver alloy. The gold alloy solidified in a random pattern,
whereas the palladium-silver metal-ceramic alloy solidified in a unidirectional manner.
Eames WB, O’Neal SJ, Monteiro J, et al: Techniques to improve the seating of castings, J Am Dent Assoc 96:432–437, 1978.
Die spacing was the most suitable method to compensate for casting variables and to ensure improved marginal adaptation while also
increasing retention by 25%.
Earnshaw R: The effect of casting ring liners on the potential expansion of a gypsum-bonded investment, J Dent Res 67:1366–1370,
1988.
Total expansion, setting expansion, and thermal expansion of the
investment setting against a smooth dry surface was 1.7%; against
a dry ceramic liner, 1.6% to 1.7%; and against wet cellulose or wet
asbestos, 2.2% to 2.3%. The ceramic liner can be used wet if it is
treated with a surfactant instead of water.
Finger W: Effect of the setting expansion of dental stone upon the die
precision, Scand J Dent Res 88:159–160, 1980.
The addition of potassium sulfate and borax to type IV gypsums
reduced setting expansion without affecting the physical properties.
Finger W, Ohsawa M: Accuracy of cast restorations produced by a
refractory die-investing technique, J Prosthet Dent 52:800–803,
1984.
By minimizing distortion of the wax pattern, the refractory dieinvesting procedure can produce consistently accurate cast gold alloy
restorations.
Hansen P: Predictable casting for dimensional shrinkage of fast-cast postand-cores, Oper Dent 39:367–373, 2014.
The use of a phosphate investment with an accelerated technique was
found to produce consistent and predictable shrinkage of cast postand-cores.
Haralur SB, Hamdi OA, Al-Shahrani AA, et al: The effect of casting ring
liner length and prewetting on the marginal adaptation and dimensional accuracy of full crown castings, J Int Soc Prev Community Dent
7:52–57, 2017.
This study shows that the dry cellulose ring liners provides better marginal adaptation in comparison to prewet cellulose ring liners, and
accurate cuspal height was obtained with shorter ring liner in comparison to full-length cellulose ring liners.

Ito M, Kuroiwa A, Nagasawa S, et al: Effect of wax melting range and
investment liquid concentration on the accuracy of a three-quarter
crown casting, J Prosthet Dent 87:57–61, 2002.
Two phosphate-bonded investment mixtures were prepared: 100%
special liquid and 75% special liquid. Casting shrinkage was smaller
with the use of 100% special liquid. The casting shrinkage increased
when waxes with a higher softening temperature were used.
Ito M, Yamagishi T, Oshida Y, et al: Effect of selected physical properties of waxes on investments and casting shrinkage, J Prosthet
Dent 75:211–216, 1996.
This study evaluated the relationship between properties of paraffin and dental inlay waxes to casting shrinkage when patterns were
invested with a phosphate-bonded investment. Casting shrinkage
decreased as the flow of the wax pattern increased. If a low-flow wax or
thick pattern is used, the size of the casting ring should be increased.
Jorgensen KD, Okamoto A: Restraining factors affecting setting expansion of phosphate-bonded investments, Scand J Dent Res 94:178–181,
1986.
The authors suggest that setting expansion is a highly unreliable means
to compensate partially for the thermal contraction of casting alloys.
Jorgensen KD, Ono T: Distortion of wax crowns, Scand J Dent Res
92:253–256, 1984.
Distortion of wax crowns is enough to reduce the fit of the final restoration to a degree that is clinically unacceptable. This study suggests
that wax pattern distortion may be minimized only by use of a pattern/die investing technique.
Junner RE, Stevens L: Anisotropic setting expansion of phosphatebonded investment, Aust Dent J 31:434–439, 1986
In this study, the vertical setting expansion was significantly greater than
the horizontal expansion in a rigid ring with liners. A flexible ring offered
little restriction to horizontal expansion, reducing mold distortion.
Kalavathi M, Sachin B, Prasanna BG: Accuracy of castings fabricated with
ringless casting investment system and metal ring casting investment
system: A comparative study, J Contemp Dent Pract 17:165–170, 2016.
The study shows that ringless casting technique had produced better
marginal accuracy compared with conventional casting technique.
Kanitkar AA, Kanitkar AS, Sasane RS, et al: Analyse the effect of different investment techniques and pattern materials on surface roughness
of raw Ni-Cr castings—an in vitro study, J Indian Prosthodont Soc
20:97–103, 2020.
Wax patterns and resin patterns invested under increased pressure
produce smoother casting surface than those invested at atmospheric
pressure.
Kaplan J, Newman SM: Accuracy of the divestment casting technique,
Oper Dent 8:82–87, 1983.
These investigators found that castings made using the divestment
procedure fit more accurately than did castings made using a
conventional stone-die and gypsum-bonded refractory investment
technique.
Lautenschlager EP, Harcourt JK, Ploszaj LC: Setting reaction of gypsum
materials investigated by x-ray diffraction, J Dent Res 48:43–48, 1969
An early study of the conversion from calcium sulfate hemihydrate to
calcium sulfate dihydrate.
Leal MB, Pagnano VO, Bezzon OL: Effect of investment type and mold
temperature on casting accuracy and titanium-ceramic bond, Braz
Dent J 24:40–46, 2013.
For casting accuracy, expressed by marginal deficiency in micron, there
is a difference between investment materials used, and the increase
in temperature resulted in different effects for the tested investments.
Mackert JR, Jr: An expert system for analysis of casting failures, Int J
Prosthodont 1:268–280, 1988.
An expert system was proposed for the diagnosis of common lost-wax
casting problems, based on an interactive consultation session at a
PC station, during which the user answered questions about defective
castings. The computer responded with conclusions on the most likely
cause of each problem.

325.e1

Mahler DB, Ady AB: An explanation for the hygroscopic setting expansion of dental gypsum products, J Dent Res 39:578, 1960.
A classic publication on the theory of hygroscopic setting expansion.
An excellent reference for those interested in the mechanics of this
phenomenon.
Martin KH: An investigation of the effect of the water/powder ratio on the
accuracy of the fit of gold alloy castings, Aust Dent J 1:202–203, 1956.
Use of the correct water/powder ratio with a gypsum investment is
essential to obtain a good fit of castings, especially when the low-heat
technique is used.
Matsuya S, Yamane M: Decomposition of gypsum-bonded investments,
J Dent Res 60:1418–1423, 1981.
At 900 °C, decomposition of gypsum-bonded investments occurred,
leading to the formation of CaSiO3 and Ca2SiO4.
Mueller HJ, Reyes W, McGill S: Surfactant-containing phosphate investment, Dent Mater 2:42–44, 1986.
The addition of surfactants in a phosphate-bonded casting investment
can increase the hygroscopic setting expansion. The surfactant also makes
the unset investment more viscous and reduces the compressive strength.
Naylor WP, Moore BK, Phillips RW: A topographical assessment of casting ring liners using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Quint Dent
Technol 11:413–420, 1987.
Three types of nonasbestos ring liners exist: ceramic, cellulose, and a
ceramic-cellulose combination. A liner containing an aluminosilicate
component has the potential to produce respirable-size ceramic particles.
Neiman R, Sarma AC: Setting and thermal reactions of phosphate
investments, J Dent Res 59:1478–1485, 1980.
The authors concluded that setting took place through the complex
formation of [NH4MgPO4.6H2O]n, excess reactants, and water, and
that dehydration and thermal reactions led to a sequence of reactions resulting in the formation of [NH4MgPO4.H2O], [Mg2P2O7]n,
Mg2P2O7, and Mg3[PO4]2.
Nielsen JP: Pressure distribution in centrifugal dental casting, J Dent Res
57:261–269, 1978.
This article discusses the factors contributing to the pressure gradient that
develops along the length of a casting in a centrifugal casting machine.
Nielsen JP, Ollerman R: Suck-back porosity, Quint Dent Technol 1:61–65,
1976.
Using a gold-palladium-silver alloy with different sprue former
lengths, diameters, and angles of attachment, lower casting temperature and flaring of the sprue former reduced suck-back porosity. The
authors postulated that a “hot spot” is created in the mold that causes
this type of porosity.
Nomura GT, Reisbick MH, Preston JD: An investigation of epoxy resin
dies, J Prosthet Dent 44:45–50, 1980.
In a comparison of three epoxy die materials with a type IV stone,
full crown epoxy dies were undersized, MOD onlay resin dies were
accurate, and detail reproduction was found to be comparable to the
type IV gypsum. However, only one epoxy material had a hardness
approaching that of the dental stone.
Otun A, Lee H, Geminiani A, et al: Ring liner and burn-out temperature affect the clinical time required to fit a cast post, J Prosthet Dent
102:224–228, 2009.
Investing a post pattern without a ring liner and setting a lower final
burn-out temperature yield cast posts that require significantly less
adjustment time for clinical placement.
Pieralini AR, Benjamin CM, Ribeiro RF, et al: The effect of coating patterns with spinel-based investment on the castability and
porosity of titanium cast into three phosphate-bonded investments, J Prosthodont 19:517–522, 2010.
The results show that investing technique with coating increased the
castability for all phosphate-bonded investments.

325.e2

Prasad R, Al-Keraif AA, Kathuria N, et al: Accuracy of ringless casting
and accelerated wax-elimination technique: a comparative in vitro
study, J Prosthodont 23:157–162, 2014.
The ringless investment technique can produce castings with higher
accuracy and can be favorably combined with the accelerated waxelimination method.
Saber FS, Abolfazli N, Mahboub F, et al: The effect of occlusal surface
relief of dies on marginal adaptation of metal-ceramic casting copings,
J Prosthodont 22:287–291, 2013.
Leaving the occlusal part of the die uncovered with the die spacer
during investing procedure improved the crown seating considerably
in the occlusal surface, as well as shoulder and bevel margins.
Santos JF, Ballester RY: Delayed hygroscopic expansion of phosphatebonded investments, Dent Mater 3:165–167, 1987.
Delayed hygroscopic expansion occurs when the investment is
immersed in water after setting. Increased time of immersion and an
increase in the special liquid concentration increased the hygroscopic
setting expansion.
Smith CT, Diefenderfer KE: A direct refractory die technique for cast
gold restorations, Oper Dent 42:122–132, 2017.
This article demonstrates a laboratory technique in which the final
restoration is cast directly on the refractory die without removing the
wax pattern.
Steinbock AF: An overview of dental waxes, Dental Lab News, 1989 50
July.
Stevens L: The effect of early heating on the expansion of a phosphatebonded investment, Aust Dent J 28:366–369, 1983.
The thermal expansion of a phosphate-bonded investment decreased
as heating was delayed from 1 to 6 hours after mixing. The setting
expansion increased as the special liquid replaced water for mixing.
Taggart WH: A new and accurate method of making gold inlays, Dent
Cosmos 49:1117–1121, 1907.
The dental “lost wax” process was developed by Taggart, opening the
opportunity to cast accurate restorations in an investment mold.
Tourah A, Moshaverinia A, Chee WW: Effects of setting under
air pressure on the number of surface pores and irregularities
of dental investment materials, J Prosthet Dent 111:150–153,
2014.
Specimens set under positive pressure in a pressure chamber presented fewer surface bubbles than specimens set under atmospheric
pressure. Positive pressure is effective and, therefore, is recommended for both gypsum-bonded and phosphate-bonded investment materials.
Vaidyanathan TK, Schulman A, Nielsen JP, et al: Correlation between
macroscopic porosity location and liquid metal pressure in centrifugal
casting technique, J Dent Res 60:59–66, 1981.
Radiographic analysis revealed that the porosity is dependent on the
location at which the sprue is attached to the casting. The location
of the macroscopic porosity, at portions of the casting close to the
free surface of the button, is dependent on the pressure gradient
and therefore different heat transfer rates in different portions of
the casting.
Verrett RG, Duke ES: The effect of sprue attachment design on castability
and porosity, J Prosthet Dent 61:418–424, 1989.
Flared and straight sprue attachments optimized castability and minimized porosity.
Zeltser C, Lewinstein I, Grajower R: Fit of crown wax patterns after
removal from the die, J Prosthet Dent 53:344–346, 1985.
The effects of loading wax patterns before investment was determined. Repetitive loading revealed that the plastic deformation in
wax was less after the second loading than after the first cycle for a
specific load.

